

 
LET us go then, you and I, 
When the evening is spread out against the sky  
Like a patient etherized upon a table; 
Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,  
The muttering retreats          5
Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels 
And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:  
Streets that follow like a tedious argument  
Of insidious intent  
To lead you to an overwhelming question….         10
Oh, do not ask, “What is it?” 
Let us go and make our visit. 
 
In the room the women come and go   
Talking of Michelangelo.   
 GARDEN of bliss, where fairest flowers are culled;   
    Rich mine of treasures, wanting no bright gem; 
Serpentless Eden of a blesséd pair; 
    Best jewel in a life’s bright diadem. 
 
Hence with the thought of shame to him who deems           5
THERE was a damned successful Poet; 
  There was a Woman like the Sun.   
And they were dead. They did not know it. 
  They did not know their time was done.  
  They did not know his hymns         5
  Were silence; and her limbs,   
  That had served Love so well,  
  Dust, and a filthy smell.   
  That silence again
             a wall
of feathers, and near
 
enough
            to block the
circuit of our time—
 
Adobe wall,
           roads of dust—
thirty two years
 
until the bones
            discoursed—
That's how long
 
I've dug into
            myself—
And the baby?
 
She is a promise—
            ungraspable,
mist—
 
Fuss or no fuss,
           yearn, yearn,
yearn. Heart
 
pounds, ears

3 AM walks on Fridays across the Marais—from that insomniac
bar on Rue de Lappe, via a Place des Vosges gurgling secrets
in her sleep, zagging down to Rue du Roi de Sicile before
zigging back to the tip of Rue des Francs-Bourgeois
((sound asleep)), with pit stops to salute gothic
gargoyles, brush Art Deco façades, and peer
at miniature parks penned in for the night—
then up Boulevard de Sébastopol, up north,
all the way north to your shared digs
in Château Rouge, holding a wasted,
bedraggled moon aloft, turn by
slow turn—first you, then I—
till he would faint & fall
from an unsafe,
matinal
sky.    

 Fortnightly
sessions—when down
to the last clean fitted sheet—
at the prematurely aged laundrette
rasping out wrong or no change on the top
floor (was it? Or does memory begin to fray?) of
Résidence André Allix, high above the funicular station
at Saint-Juste, Vieux Lyon; some years later, the same ritual
with the swankier, snootier machines in Château-Landon, Paris
claiming more coins; the tortuous rides you would take to reach—
each time—before I’d begin to fold the cobalt nakshi kantha
quilt (you had brought back from a fair trade crafts village
near the northern suburbs of Dhaka) that you knew
I should trip over—each time—if left alone (that
quilt still alive, still untorn: strangers tend
to help, most, keen to touch, to stroke
the wealth of colors, to ask, Where
is it/are you from? One came
home the other day). 
Vernal
morning-walk
battles simmering
from the night before,
wildfiring, pyring by the axis
of Parc Josaphat in Schaerbeek;
our voices scorching the sleep-filled
wings of the neighboring swans, and
words—both barbed and burning—whirl-
pooling the ponds beneath their feet, then all
of it—the earth, the air, the green, that high blaze
of words and decibels, yes, everything—unspooling
in a snarl of arms and thighs, hips and groins, extra-large
elbows, tongues and—it once even felt—uncaged ribs with
double, smelted hearts, purple-hot beneath and hammering their
own daft, arrhythmic anthem, overheard only by an inquiring fox
 


 If you must hear      the story
of my turbulent gaze      after waking,

the march of my hours      to hermit
into a higher body,      it is that

whatever you put            into the Universe
eventually       returns.

In our oneness      of gift,
                     we are eyes together,

nerves together,         affected together.
If I’ve never      told you

how madly we share      in the stars,

how it was all      founded      for you,
then let the longing      for Arcturus

                     be the gilding      of our sleep.

I know      when your time      was in its
making,      I was left      to sing alone,

unfed      to trample through      a hundred
layers      of night      without a heart

                                   to hold my guard.
These are all ancient names of what you will once call home.


The shape of the fire altar is independent of time.
hen death fell asleep between my legs
One arm slung over my knee
I pulled her up to my leaking breasts
And heard her grind her teeth

—

Does not inhabit herself
Stun guns of solar hair and eye flash hide her age
Born in a mirror in water precariously unheld
Will never die

—

Sometimes runeface spreads
Wind wrinkling a lake
Dolphins flipping at eyes and mouth

Sometimes a crucifix
Nose the bent of spine
Splayed veins from eyebolts

—

A bit inconvenient
To die just to drop

This sticky lover
That loveless parent

If only one could just get plastic surgery
Change lives behind the shrubbery

—

Not fair

I get older so
Do you I
Never catch

Up you train me
For your death

To my patterns you do
Patterns I want something

To shock you
My namesake tree

To drop all its leaves
In the center of spring

Remind me what
I gain by being here

Love me in a hurry

St. Andrews. Forbach. Gothenburg. Sète. Douai. Roubaix. The towns we knew as shapes at night, or a stranger in the next berth half-hidden beneath a duvet. A whirling midnight of boat-hopping in Nantes. Half of Lyon from 2001: all the mornings julienned into sunshine and periwinkle skies at Croix-Rousse; Sunday ends at La Cigale (or was it La Fourmi, or both?), redolent of the ashes and smoke and crimson drapes of Wong Kar-wai; the salad bowl tossing an ever-delayed sunrise over your cracked skylight; those 73 lines (563 words) you managed to fit alongside eternity on an un-postmarked card. Some constellations—Aquarius, Aries, Hydra, Pegasus. The blue-and-canary-yellow polka-dotted python who still gobbles me up on the 99th square. A weekend in Rouen where I drank the sun with a red plastic straw. Dimples on your stubbled left cheek that surface from a dream at 5 am alone, my wonder at their constancy. Your hands wrapped around my fugitive breath even through those dreams. The sight of a baby in the metro who looked like she could be ours (and my relief she was not). The July afternoon the sun left the map of Spain on a thigh. The year I turned cartographer at beachside siestas, mapping the stir of sand across your back, the blue rivulets under your skin navigating their way toward a heartbeat. The giant, prismatic, poster of Mira Nair’s Monsoon Wedding covering fissures on a kitchen wall; two wickerwork laundry baskets from Dinjan; wooden ladles, now splintered; that livid indigo hand-braided quilt: the first among joint possessions. Twelve-hour road trips across France under unwashed stars to help resettle schoolmates. Piles of moldy Satyajit Ray VHS tapes. A map of free Bangladesh. The Maori mask gifted by a fellow passenger on the train from Georgetown. Noughts-and-crosses played on the rafters of a hotel ceiling. Every yesterday but the second, quieter than the first yet more fragrant. Keep them, and stay: yes, they are yours from today.  




I ran across the street, I didn’t know any better.
Ran out in the street, I didn’t know no better.
I just knew a woman was there, though I’d never met her.

She sat me in her parlor, distracted me with trinkets,
milky glass birds and fish, distracting trinkets.
She said my mother would be fine, but did she think it?

The world was a blur of crystal wings and fins.
My tears were casked in crystal, wings and fins.
She was the first of many lady-friends.

The tree shadows shortened, she brought me a drink of water.
Morning matured, she brought me a glass of water.
I drank it so fast, she went and brought another.

I kept looking out the window, she didn’t ask me what for.
I watched out that window, she didn’t ask what for.
The seconds broke off and lay there on the floor.

I imagined my mother’s route, as far as I could.
Her long morning walk, followed as far as I could.
Nothing I could do would do any good.

Suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Christ said suffer the little children, and forbid them not.
Said love thy neighbor, sometimes she’s all you got.
Everything we do and say in patriarchy can be traced
back to “Strangers in the Night.” Your faded jeans, my
faint daytime smile. (Dazzling’s so expensive.) Bad
Mailer novels; lose-money-quick schemes. A fortune in
friendship, nevertheless. Beef farmers favor self-flesh
awareness. (Or brittle in toffee queen regimes.) Thoughts
as feats of strength. The figure in the woodpile as a
white snake, two needle bites. The end of the week, of
us, strangers now or not? I’m dressed in white, I am the
right blonde in the wrong seaplane, I haven’t learnt the

language yet. The meta-leopards will have taken over
the aquarium. They’ll stroll this way like kangaroos to
green glass. Papa, I’ve upset you. There’ll be a line of
songs like crystals lining up to kiss the bell that says Big
Town. We are on the roof now, playing to Central Park
everyone hot in their coats. Paid for not stolen. They
admit to being too late for miracles, for charity. The
poem’s parents are in the front row. The poem’s friend
interprets. Can we repeat it without going back to the
start, the lover’s demand like ants beneath the plaint?

In Eden, in Athens, estrangement flowers. We turn and
return. Is it love itself, beckoning from the lurid grass-
lands? There’s a cuteness to plaster’s novelty hiding of
the body. People are cited in the mouth, stand on the
ground. They fly like Lucy. You can deny it all for fun
and parties, as if the mind was the feeling that input
gives. It’s a power no one likes to admit, as it so often
leads to failure in later life, like living in a swimming
pool, or losing your tongue in the mail. What of
romances with characters from books? Alice says hello
Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound:
beneath the house, the kegs roll in;
the party flips its switches down.

When drunk comes, it comes as sound,
a chord, a liftoff. I ride the rim,
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound.

He could be anyone, and he abounds.
I slip inside a dance with him.
The party flips its switches down.

Let’s go, he says, upstairs now.
My cup spills. My shirt is skin.

ut all I want to do is marry them on a beach

that refuses to take itself too seriously.

So much of our lives has been serious.

Over time, I’ve learned that love is most astonishing

when it persists after learning where we come from.

When I bring my partner to my childhood home

it is all bullets and needles and trash bags held

at arm’s length. It is my estranged father’s damp

bed of cardboard and cigar boxes filled

with gauze and tarnished spoons. It is hard

to clean a home, but it is harder to clean

the memory of it. When I was young, my

father would light lavender candles and shoot

up. Now, my partner and I light a fire that will

burn all traces of the family that lived here.

Black plastic smoke curdles up, and loose bullets

discharge in the flames. My partner holds

my hand as gunfire rings through

the birch trees. Though this is almost

From up here in the leaves’ no-kidding goldishness
you’d guess everyone was already in lovely w/ each
others’ cheekbones. Infinity scarves
& vanilla coffee, mint tea, warm whatever.
Cozy becoming the coming-at-the-seams, a couplet
of verbs mid-bodily inexperience.
That man doing cartwheels is not wearing a shirt
& in any other life I’d want to be the double dare
fanfaring a future so totally astonished
by his nipples. This is what I mean

when I say things like catastrophe.
Okay, fine. Just one more winter.
Nothing can compare anymore to us anymore.
You big good oak limb. I’m in such cute like w/ you today.

In one diary of my have-beens, my mother
named me Elizabeth after one of her
mothers. You god particle. You matrilineage.
I’ve never lived anywhere more
or less this haunted. She named my sister
Elizabeth. You boy
genius. You midsummer pinky promise ring.

There’s this person I know I’m not in love w/ but wears
a dress patterned like a postcard from the state my grandma
died in. Imagine waking up
a whole frame away from your bedsheets. Imagine
waking up & being anything as yellow
as a dress. You treeline. You root song. What’s an amount
of time equal
to you? You kindling ring finger. You unchewable bark
but the headache’s gone. Pardon me, dandelions,
have you seen my ghost, six foot nothing,

has an interstate for a mother but also a mother? Adjust
your spurs, honeybunch. This time I’m writing all of us
in pink ink. Let’s huckle-buckle off into the leafiest
of all possible genderings. You know how the rain
starts right after you get home & the country song
your friend slow-danced w/ her big love to, the one
your mom would play real quiet on her moonbeam
highway streak back to Pensacola, is somehow

already at the chorus & you forget there are words like joy?
Or when someone whispers Imagine you never met them
back at the bum, grinning stars? You remember.
It’s like that.
Or, is that. The difference between salt & salt. A someday
of matching sweaters.
Told you it’s cute. O sweaters. O little knit
bundles of vegetable-spit. It’s always sunsetting.

You golden hour. You soap-soft seasonal.
Once my mom found me
sitting in a circle of candles, touching each rosebud
& sat w/ me until we were wax musuems
of our secrets. Look—
the sky’s a toenail & the moon’s a chesthair. All the shirtless
boys have tired themself out, spread-eagled
& slapping the sun off their shoulder blades. My body is a line
heading for my body. You crushed-grass
sex smell. You dirt-inverted comma. Someone w/ bleached
hair is biking home to restud their denim.
I rediscovered kissing foreheads & it is so yes again.

Hurry up & sunspot, daylilies!
The cops aren’t going to awe themselves
to death & we have
a dictionary to laugh across.
by going you have to be and
seek it
out
 
said the starlet in the shared volitional language of space and time
explanation thrashes round the thing but doesn’t touch it
the thing we know then as /style of thrashing/ or
ripples in the pond sufficient
in itself, she licks her tongue, it could be desired as a figure—
 
faithless as a class of examples
i found new objects swimming blankly in a common
sense, by going alone to listen
                                                to them
                         in the night
            light of their pool—
 Oh! yet one smile, tho' dark may lower 
Around thee clouds of woe and ill, 
Let me yet feel that I have power, 
Mid Fate's bleak storms, to soothe thee still. 

Tho' sadness be upon thy brow, 
Yet let it turn, dear love, to me, 
I cannot bear that thou should'st know 
Sorrow I do not share with thee. 

True love's wreath is of mountain flowers, 
They stand the storm and brave the blast, 
And blossom on, so love like ours 
Is sweetest when all else is past. 

Too well I know what storms have frowned, 
And now frown on life's troubled tide; 
Still darker let them gather round, 
They have no power on hearts so tried. 

Then say not that you may not bear, 
To shadow spirit light as mine; 
I shall not shrink, or fear to share 
The darkest fate if it be thine!
 

Oh! say not love was never made 
For heart so light as mine; 
Must love then seek the cypress shade, 
Rear but a gloomy shrine. 

Oh! say not, that for me more meet 
The revelry of youth; 
Or that my wild heart cannot beat 
With deep devoted truth. 

Tho' mirth may many changes ring, 
'Tis but an outward show, 
Even upon the fond dove's wing 
Will varying colours glow. 

Light smiles upon my lip may gleam 
And sparkle o'er my brow, 
'Tis but the glisten of the stream 
That hides the gold below. 

'Tis love that gilds the mirthful hour, 
That lights the smile for me, 
Those smiles would instant lose their power, 
Did they not glance on thee!
 

Oh! come to my slumber 
Sweet dreams of my love, 
I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above. 

The roses are linked 
In a chain pure and white; 
And the rose-leaves are wet 
With the dew drops of night. 

The moon was on high 
As I gather'd each flower; 
The dew that then falls 
Has a magical power. 

The Spirit of slumber 
Those roses has blest; 
And sweet are the visions 
They'll bring to my rest. 

Be their spell on my soul, 
So they let me but see 
His dark eyes flash in love 
And his smile glance on me. 

Let sleep bring the image 
Of him far away; 
'Tis worth all the tears 
I shed for him by day. 

I have hung the charmed wreath 
My soft pillow above; 
Then come to my slumber, 
Sweet dreams of my love!
 

How vain to cast my love away 
On bosom false as thine; 
The floweret's bloom, that springs in May, 
Would be a safer shrine 

To build my fondest hopes upon, 
Tho' fragile it may be. 
That flower's smile is not sooner gone 
Than love that trusts to thee. 

Love asks a calm, a gentle home, 
Or else its life is o'er; 
If once you let its pinions roam, 
Oh! then 'tis love no more. 

The aspin's changefuI shade can be 
No shelter for the dove; 
And hearts as varying as that tree, 
Are sure no place for love. 

Hope linger'd long and anxiously, 
O'er failing faith, but now 
I give thee back each heartless sigh, 
Give back each broken vow. 

I'll trust the stay of tulip dyes, 
The calm of yon wild sea, 
The sunshine of the April skies, 
But never more to thee! 
 

Oh! would that love had power to raise 
A little isle for us alone, 
With fairy flowers, and sunny rays, 
The blue sea wave its guardian zone. 

No other step should ever press 
This hidden Eden of the heart, 
And we would share its loveliness, 
From every other thing apart. 

The rose and violet should weep, 
Whene'er our leafy couch was laid, 
The lark should wake our morning sleep, 
The bulbul sing our serenade. 
f it became impossible to touch and be touched, to see
and be seen, to love and trade ecstasy for risk where risk
is ecstasy, to be hidden in plain view, to be perfectly lost
which means lost to the world, lying side-by-side arms linked
in a bond so intricate it could never unfold or break—
If it became crucial to live out of sight, to be housebound,
to walk a beaten path in the garden, to sit at the window
blurred by rainfall, to sit barred and blocked, books
set aside that would never be read, rolling news of flash flood
and fire, angels treading the updraft, a chaos of voices—
If dreams should give the rest of it: the path in the garden
going underground, flood and fire as God’s only gift
the house holding its secrets, that pattern of locked rooms,
what lies outside (voices: angels) crowding the perimeter—


You could make an installation of it
(and why not?) on a bare floor
in a bare hall under neon strip:
what seems thrown down what seems
heap after heap of discards but is not:
hair and shoes and spectacles
and clothes (teeth also saved)
repetition such that it blurs
images folding into one another
abstract, just shape being evident
except this shoe except
this lens catching the light which is
error or artifact, something like
iron litter carefully thrown down
by Joseph Beuys but more the bright
grotesque of Bacon’s Fragment,
of Dubuffet’s L’Arbre de fluides,
what’s torn what’s wrenched apart?...
Heap after heap, grainy footage
of a cattle train snowscape
smokestacks, scratch orchestra, what
more do you need?...?dogs?...?what more
do you need of this: the train
all but silent in snow, footage
of carcasses thrown down naked,
you could make a montage of it:
quick hands, a low sun deepening
to yellow by trees and towers,
the way shadows are cast, the light
you need, the shapes you need
a sureness of touch to bring it all
together, perhaps a light box
fragments and fractures backlit
and all of a piece not least
the new dead: they lie
in a scatter, your focal point
they make sudden broken
angels in the snow.
Fool steps up. His art is palimpsest.
He’ll tag your work: spray-paint
a ditzy orange bug-eyed frog
at the door of the charnel house
color the snowscape blue, redact
the chimneys, configure the train
with silver-and-black chevrons:
a snake drawn up to the iron gate,
his artwork: Evil is as evil does.
The frog spits bile. The snake
is hollow-eyed. He adds
speech bubbles to the cold still air:
“Hosanna Hosanna Ho—sa—nna”:


 when the air shaped like the inverse of Megan
accepts Megan as she moves.

    If Megan is a system of exchange
that floats her labor and her point

  of view in vapor/liquid soup
passàging through her valves

and if her later corpse, collapsing,
 updates its inversion of the air

 even more than did the air displace
when she grew from brown-eyed baby

into strong laboring woman in blue jeans
  and heathered wool,

and if the air and earth draw from Megan’s corpse
  all the energy and minerals

 she pulled from her surrounds
to build her nails and bones and teeth—

 if the exchange doesn’t stop
but only ceases to support her consciousness,

 and if her consciousness was corpse anyway until
it found relation,

 then what demises
is the potential for the human social,

and another sociality
 will unbutton my whole shoe

and tongue hang limp,
  what sex is for but stops me

 at the barrier, a pixelated
glamour reef though very

   close and simple, smell a
  flurry, parapluie paraphrase,

 energy funneled through a shape.
You filtered chemical

 information in such a pointy
fulgent scrambled way, in the city
I thought I had lost myself,
but I see it’s you that’s gone missing.

O always elsewhere.

What yacht or spaceship have you hijacked?

In what seedy hideaway do you scoff
at the sameness of all cities, all ideas?

Once you made me loquacious
because what’s the point in saying anything
if there isn’t the possibility of being misunderstood.

Now I am nearly speechless with boredom.
I will wait Madame Butterfly-style for your return.

Light falls from her voice
and I try to catch it as the last
light of the day fades?...
But there is no form to touch,
no pain to trace.

2

Are dreams
taking their seats
on the night train?

3

She recites a list of wishes
to keep him from dying.

4

The truth lands like a kiss—
sometimes like a mosquito,
sometimes like a lantern.

5

Your coffee-colored skin
awakens me to the world.

6

We have only one minute
and I love you.

7

All children are poets
until they quit the habit
of reaching for butterflies
that are not there.

8

The moment you thought you lost me,
you saw me clearly
with all of my flowers,
even the dried ones.

9

If you pronounce all letters
and vowels at once,
you would hear their names
falling drop by drop
with the rain.

10

We carved
our ancestral trees into boats.
The boats sailed into harbors
that looked safe from afar.

11

Trees talk to each other
like old friends
and don’t like to be interrupted.
They follow anyone who
cuts one of them,
turning that person
into a lonely cut branch.
Is this why in Arabic
we say “cut of a tree”
when we mean
“having no one”?

12

The way roots hide
under trees—
there are secrets,
faces, and wind
behind the colors
in Rothko’s untitled canvases.

13

Will the sea forget its waves,
as caves forgot us?

14

Back when there was no language
they walked until sunset
carrying red leaves
like words to remember.

15

It’s true that pain
is like air, available
everywhere,
but we each feel
our pain hurts the most.

16

So many of them died
under stars
that don’t know their names.

17

If she just survived with me.

18

A flame dims in the fireplace,
a day slips quietly away from the calendar,
and Fairuz sings, “They say love kills time,
and they also say time kills love.”

19

The street vendor offers tourists
necklaces with divided hearts,
seashells to murmur the sea’s secrets in your ear,
squishy balls to make you feel better,
maps of homelands you fold
in your pocket as you go on your way.

20
Of many reasons I love you here is one

the way you write me from the gate at the airport
so I can tell you everything will be alright

so you can tell me there is a bird
trapped in the terminal      all the people
ignoring it       because they do not know
what to do with it       except to leave it alone
until it scares itself to death

it makes you terribly terribly sad

You wish you could take the bird outside
and set it free or       (failing that)
call a bird-understander
to come help the bird
The shine on her buckle took precedence in sun
Her shine, I should say, could take me anywhere
It feels right to be up this close in tight wind
It feels right to notice all the shiny things about you
About you there is nothing I wouldn’t want to know
With you nothing is simple yet nothing is simpler
About you many good things come into relation
I think of proofs and grammar, vowel sounds, like
A is for knee socks, E for panties
I is for buttondown, O the blouse you wear
U is for hair clip, and Y your tight skirt
The music picks up again, I am the man I hope to be
The bright air hangs freely near your newly cut hair
It is so easy now to see gravity at work in your face
Easy to understand time, that dark process
To accept it as a beautiful process, your face

Guy calls the doctor, says the wife’s   
contractions are five minutes apart.   
Doctor says, Is this her first child?
guy says, No, it’s her husband.

I promise to try to remember who   
I am. Wife gets up on one elbow,

says, I wanted to get married.   
It seemed a fulfillment of some

several things, a thing to be done.   
Even the diamond ring was some

thing like a quest, a thing they   
set you out to get and how insane

the quest is; how you have to turn   
it every way before you can even

think to seek it; this metaphysical   
refraining is in fact the quest. Who’d
Waking
on the train, I thought   
we were attacked
It has been so wet stones glaze in moss;
everything blooms coldly.
Cherry plums suck a week’s soak,
overnight they explode into the scenery of before
your touch. The curtains open on the end of our past.
Pink trumpets on the vines bare to the hummingbirds.
Butterflies unclasp from the purse of their couplings, they
light and open on the doubled hands of eucalyptus fronds.
They sip from the pistils for seven generations that bear
them through another tongue as the first year of our
punishing mathematic begins clicking the calendar
forward. They land like seasoned rocks on the
decks of the cliffs. They take another turn
on the spiral of life where the blossoms
blush & pale in a day of dirty dawn
where the ghost of you webs
your limbs through branches
of cherry plum. Rare bird,
extinct color, you stay in
my dreams in x-ray. In
rerun, the bone of you
stripping sweethearts
folds and layers the
shedding petals of
my grief into a
decayed holo-
There is a hornet in the room   
and one of us will have to go   
out the window into the late   
August midafternoon sun. I
won. There is a certain challenge   
in being humane to hornets   
but not much. A launch draws   
two lines of wake behind it   
on the bay like a delta
with a melted base. Sandy   
billows, or so they look,
of feathery ripe heads of grass,   
an acid-yellow kind of
goldenrod glowing or glowering   
in shade. Rocks with rags   
of shadow, washed dust clouts   
that will never bleach.
It is not like this at all.   
The rapid running of the   
lapping water a hollow knock
of someone shipping oars:   
it’s eleven years since   
Frank sat at this desk and   
saw and heard it all   
the incessant water the   
immutable crickets only   
not the same: new needles   
on the spruce, new seaweed   
on the low-tide rocks   
other grass and other water   
even the great gold lichen   
on a granite boulder   
even the boulder quite   
literally is not the same

      II
A day subtle and suppressed   
in mounds of juniper enfolding   
scratchy pockets of shadow
while bigness—rocks, trees, a stump—
stands shadowless in an overcast   
of ripe grass. There is nothing   
but shade, like the boggy depths   
of a stand of spruce, its resonance   
just the thin scream
of mosquitoes ascending.
Boats are light lumps on the bay   
stretching past erased islands   
to ocean and the terrible tumble   
and London (“rain persisting”)   
and Paris (“changing to rain”).   
Delicate day, setting the bright
of a young spruce against the cold
of an old one hung with unripe cones   
each exuding at its tip
gum, pungent, clear as a tear,   
a day tarnished and fractured   
as the quartz in the rocks
of a dulled and distant point,   
a day like a gull passing
with a slow flapping of wings   
in a kind of lope, without
breeze enough to shake loose   
the last of the fireweed flowers,
a faintly clammy day, like wet silk   
stained by one dead branch   
the harsh russet of dried blood.
gram—my
for ever
empty
art.

I expect you. I thought one night it was you
at the base of the drive, you at the foot of the stairs,

you in a shiver of light, but each time
leaves in wind revealed themselves,

the retreating shadow of a fox, daybreak.
We expect you, cat and I, bluebirds and I, the stove.

In May we dreamed of wreaths burning on bonfires
over which young men and women leapt.

June efforts quietly.
I’ve planted vegetables along each garden wall

so even if spring continues to disappoint
we can say at least the lettuce loved the rain.

I have new gloves and a new hoe.
I practice eulogies. He was a hawk

with white feathered legs. She had the quiet ribs
of a salamander crossing the old pony post road.

Yours is the name the leaves chatter
at the edge of the unrabbited woods.
            by light:   
chrome-winged birds   
For the first time, I listen to a lost
and secret recording of us
making love near-on ten years ago.

I recognize your voice, your sounds,
though if I knew no better,
I could be any man in any room.

After, the rising sounds of rising
and of dressing and once
as you step up close to the deck,

perhaps to pick up shoes, you sing
the chorus of Sunday Morning.
I call on you to hurry and we leave.

It does not end then; the tape rolls on.
A few late cars which sigh by
might have passed us walking away

triumphant, unaware we’ve left behind
this mop and mow mechanism
of silence to which we may never return.

The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone! 
Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast, 
Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone, 
Bright eyes, accomplish’d shape, and lang’rous waist! 
Faded the flower and all its budded charms, 
Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes, 
Faded the shape of beauty from my arms, 
Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise – 
Vanish’d unseasonably at shut of eve, 
When the dusk holiday – or holinight 
Of fragrant-curtain’d love begins to weave 
The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight, 
But, as I’ve read love’s missal through to-day, 
He’ll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray. 
hatching from the lagoon.

            That first day   
the buoys were all   
that made the harbor

            bearable:
pennies sewn into a hemline.   
Later I learned to live in it,

            to walk
through the alien city—
a beekeeper’s habit—

            with fierce light   
clinging to my head and hands.   
Treated as gently as every

            other guest—
each house’s barbed antennae   
trawling for any kind

            of weather—
still I sobbed in a glass box   
on an unswept street

            with the last
few lire ticking like fleas
off my phonecard I’m sorry

            I can’t
stand this, which
one of us do you love?
have guessed? She sighs, I like   
the predictability of two, I like
You did not come, 
And marching Time drew on, and wore me numb,— 
Yet less for loss of your dear presence there 
Than that I thus found lacking in your make 
That high compassion which can overbear 
Reluctance for pure lovingkindness’ sake 
Grieved I, when, as the hope-hour stroked its sum, 
You did not come. 

You love not me, 
And love alone can lend you loyalty; 
–I know and knew it. But, unto the store 
Of human deeds divine in all but name, 
Was it not worth a little hour or more 
To add yet this: Once you, a woman, came 
To soothe a time-torn man; even though it be 
You love not me? 

my pleasures fully expected,   
when the expectation of them
Somewhere or other there must surely be 
The face not seen, the voice not heard, 
The heart that not yet—never yet—ah me! 
Made answer to my word. 

Somewhere or other, may be near or far; 
Past land and sea, clean out of sight; 
Beyond the wandering moon, beyond the star 
That tracks her night by night. 

Somewhere or other, may be far or near; 
With just a wall, a hedge, between; 
With just the last leaves of the dying year 
Fallen on a turf grown green. 

grows patterned in its steady   
surprise. I’ve got my sweet
Take, oh, take those lips away 
That so sweetly were forsworn 
And those eyes, like break of day, 
Lights that do mislead the morn; 
But my kisses bring again, 
Seals of love, though sealed in vain. 

Hide, oh, hide those hills of snow, 
Which thy frozen bosom bears, 
On whose tops the pinks that grow 
Are of those that April wears; 
But first set my poor heart free, 
Bound in those icy chains by thee.
and tumble pat. Here on earth,   
I like to count upon a thing
Through your lens the sequoia swallowed me   
like a dryad. The camera flashed & forgot.
I, on the other hand, must practice my absent-
mindedness, memory being awkward as a touch   
that goes unloved. Lately your eyes have shut
down to a shade more durable than skin’s. I know you   
love distance, how it smooths. You choose an aerial view,   
the city angled to abstraction, while I go for the close   
exposures: poorly-mounted countenances along Broadway,   
the pigweed cracking each hardscrabble backlot.   
It’s a matter of perspective: yours is to love me   
from a block away & mine is to praise the grain-
iness that weaves expressively: your face.

Things happen when you drink too much mescal.
One night, with not enough food in my belly,
he kept on buying.   I’m a girl who’ll fall
damn near in love with gratitude and, well, he
was hot and generous and so the least
that I could do was let him kiss me, hard
and soft and any way you want it, beast
and beauty, lime and salt—sweet Bacchus’ pards—
and when his friend showed up I felt so warm
and generous I let him kiss me too.
His buddy asked me if it was the worm
inside that makes me do the things I do.
I wasn’t sure which worm he meant, the one
I ate?   The one that eats at me alone?


like that. Thus explained   
the woman in contractions

to her lover holding on
the telephone for the doctor

to recover from this strange   
conversational turn. You say

you’re whom? It is a pleasure   
to meet you. She rolls her

eyes, but he’d once asked her   
Am I your first lover? and she’d   
said, Could be. Your face looks   
familiar. It’s the same type of

generative error. The grammar
of the spoken word will flip, let alone

the written, until something new is   
in us, and in our conversation.



I loved you first: but afterwards your love
Outsoaring mine, sang such a loftier song
As drowned the friendly cooings of my dove.
Which owes the other most? my love was long,
And yours one moment seemed to wax more strong;
I loved and guessed at you, you construed me
And loved me for what might or might not be –
Nay, weights and measures do us both a wrong.
For verily love knows not ‘mine’ or ‘thine;’
With separate ‘I’ and ‘thou’ free love has done,
For one is both and both are one in love:
Rich love knows nought of ‘thine that is not mine;’
Both have the strength and both the length thereof,
Both of us, of the love which makes us one.
You have changed me already. I am a fireball
That is hurtling towards the sky to where you are
You can choose not to look up but I am a giant orange ball
That is throwing sparks upon your face
Oh look at them shake
Upon you like a great planet that has been murdered by change
O too this is so dramatic this shaking
Of my great planet that is bigger than you thought it would be
So you ran and hid
Under a large tree. She was graceful, I think
That tree although soon she will wither
Into ten black snakes upon your throat
And when she does I will be wandering as I always am
A graceful lady that is part museum
Of the voices of the universe everyone else forgets
I will hold your voice in a little box
And when you come upon me I won’t look back at you
You will feel a hand upon your heart while I place your voice back
Into the heart from where it came from
And I will not cry also
Although you will expect me to
I was wiser too than you had expected
For I knew all along you were mine
You are like me, you will die too, but not today:   
you, incommensurate, therefore the hours shine:   
if I say to you “To you I say,” you have not been   
set to music, or broadcast live on the ghost   
radio, may never be an oil painting or
Old Master’s charcoal sketch: you are
a concordance of person, number, voice,
and place, strawberries spread through your name   
as if it were budding shrubs, how you remind me   
of some spring, the waters as cool and clear
(late rain clings to your leaves, shaken by light wind),   
which is where you occur in grassy moonlight:   
and you are a lily, an aster, white trillium
or viburnum, by all rights mine, white star   
in the meadow sky, the snow still arriving
from its earthwards journeys, here where there is   
no snow (I dreamed the snow was you,
when there was snow), you are my right,
have come to be my night (your body takes on   
the dimensions of sleep, the shape of sleep   
becomes you): and you fall from the sky
with several flowers, words spill from your mouth
in waves, your lips taste like the sea, salt-sweet (trees   
and seas have flown away, I call it
loving you): home is nowhere, therefore you,   
a kind of dwell and welcome, song after all,   
and free of any eden we can name

All you can do is notice the bird
and feel for the bird       and write
to tell me how language feels
impossibly useless
  Busy old fool, unruly sun,
               Why dost thou thus,
Through windows, and through curtains call on us?
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run?
               Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide
               Late school boys and sour prentices,
         Go tell court huntsmen that the king will ride,
         Call country ants to harvest offices,
Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime,
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.
Drink to me only with thine eyes, 
         And I will pledge with mine; 
Or leave a kiss but in the cup, 
         And I’ll not look for wine. 
The thirst that from the soul doth rise 
         Doth ask a drink divine; 
But might I of Jove’s nectar sup, 
         I would not change for thine. 
Take all my loves, my love, yea, take them all:
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call—
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
Then if for my love thou my love receivest,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
But yet be blamed if thou this self deceivest
By wilful taste of what thyself refusest.
I do forgive thy robb’ry, gentle thief,
Although thou steal thee all my poverty;
And yet love knows it is a greater grief
To bear love’s wrong than hate’s known injury.
    Lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows,
    Kill me with spites, yet we must not be foes.
I sent thee late a rosy wreath, 
         Not so much honouring thee 
As giving it a hope, that there 
         It could not withered be. 
But thou thereon didst only breathe, 
         And sent’st it back to me; 
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear, 
         Not of itself, but thee.
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea
But sad mortality o’er-sways their power,
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea,
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O, how shall summer’s honey breath hold out
Against the wrackful siege of batt’ring days,
When rocks impregnable are not so stout,
Nor gates of steel so strong, but time decays?
O fearful meditation! where, alack,
Shall time’s best jewel from time’s chest lie hid?
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back?
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
   O, none, unless this miracle have might,
   That in black ink my love may still shine bright.


               Thy beams, so reverend and strong
               Why shouldst thou think?
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,
But that I would not lose her sight so long;
               If her eyes have not blinded thine,
               Look, and tomorrow late, tell me,
         Whether both th' Indias of spice and mine
         Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with me.
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,
And thou shalt hear, All here in one bed lay.

               She's all states, and all princes, I,
               Nothing else is.
Princes do but play us; compared to this,
All honor's mimic, all wealth alchemy.
               Thou, sun, art half as happy as we,
               In that the world's contracted thus.
         Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be
         To warm the world, that's done in warming us.
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;
This bed thy center is, these walls, thy sphere.

but you are wrong
If ever two were one, then surely we.
If ever man were loved by wife, then thee.
If ever wife was happy in a man,
Compare with me, ye women, if you can.
I prize thy love more than whole mines of gold,
Or all the riches that the East doth hold.
My love is such that rivers cannot quench,
Nor ought but love from thee give recompense.
Thy love is such I can no way repay;
The heavens reward thee manifold, I pray.
Then while we live, in love let’s so persever,
That when we live no more, we may live ever.
You are a bird-understander
better than I could ever be
who make so many noises
and call them song

These are your own words
your way of noticing
and saying plainly
of not turning away
from hurt

you have offered them
to me       I am only
giving them back

if only I could show you
how very useless
they are not
I am haunted by the melody
of a forgotten song
sung while two hands
tied my shoelaces into a ribbon
and waved me goodbye to school.

21

If I could photocopy
the moment we met
I would find it full
of all the days and nights.

22

It won’t forget the faraway child,
that city whose door stayed open
for passersby, tourists, and invaders.

23

The moon is going to the other
side of the world
to call my loved ones.

24

The seasons change
colors and you come and go.
What color is your departure?

    and outside the city in the vernal zones
   and aqua zones the city shaped, flow-charted, realist

 trucked. The city caved under
     when the zones rose and lapped around the pilings,

 manged foundations green,
      rotted the teeth out of the mouth of the city,

 harbor high-rises
dark and blown. The city is extremely fragile tender

 human mesh and will be mush
    and mushrooms grow in, there is room in, ruins

roam the rearticulated harm.



speech by a flaneur—no a flaneuse—

On my face, D. folliculorum are relaxing
 like Tenniel caterpillars leaning on mushroom stalks
  against the bases of my hair follicles
 which provide shelter and shade.
These critters are peculiar to
   the ecology of the human face
     which I take around the city
     open, close   it is my means
    of feeding   I rely on
  changing its shape
in response to others’ faces and postures
  to reduce my risk and increase my safety
   and my likelihood of being
    included in the group’s collective
      life. I smile a lot and hope it
     don’t look fake.


Children in a pool of light, a pool of dust; the way
images deceive, the way time shunts and stalls, a test
of what gathers and corrupts, what will not stay
as words unspeak, as children are lost to light and dust.
And we would watch the starry hours, 
And call the moon to hear our vows, 
And we would cull the sweetest flowers, 
And twine fresh chaplets for our brows. 
 Yes of forsythia against the limitless ivy, a nude posed in a garden
against the silver maple pinwheeling its children into a gown around her
Stricken, seen, satellite at the edge of a party,
being fifteen, with the black bulbs someone’s planted
in the mother’s lamps to give glow-in-the-dark
ambiance to hideous kisses, and the ruffles
are all wrong on the saved-for shirt, and the curtains,
suave in the murk, seem to laugh. The liquidy
fin of feeling is destination-less, twisting
like paper wrapped ’round a pinkie
in blind date anticipation. Toy for
the psyche, phrase to swim through the mind
like an offense, at 3 AM.
Half-helix, as if waiting for, Oh God, don’t
say it, a soul mate. What sheathes the stealth
bomber has something of its skin. Pastiche of pluck
and terror, nerve faltering halfway. Opposite
of starlight, stagnant brook that drowned Ophelia, JPEG
from a former colleague, on holiday, landed in spam,
looking older and captioned, Well, here I am.

chime of the cliff-hanging falcon’s screeching talons against a rabbit,
wheezing soldier in a field, gunpowder tainting the cake in his pocket

jet fuel over the Pacific, waking to a hula in a zephyr,
the bride deplaning onto an island chain, bowing to leis of plumeria

the mallow of nurses’ shoes, their news, the black sedan
of a telephone spreading it like a virus and, after, the scent of a cedar closet

white gloves of a mare, in heat, pawing clover, the sail of a Spitfire
cresting a hill in San Francisco, angelic against sunset

rosin on the cello’s catgut, a honeycombed queen calling home
her lovers, a Basquiat above the head of an ascetic, chaos over order

magenta in the thorns, shy to the shears, making the blue jays bluer,
a someone on the bed’s chenille edge, composing an oratorio of medicines

the bartender in his ice pick scars, twisting zest over his creation, wheel
and butane of his Zippo kissing as the citrus, at last, expresses
Source: Poetry (May 2019)

I thought thus of the flowers, the moon, 
This fairy isle for you and me; 
And then I thought how very soon 
How very tired we should be.
 

                  Matrimonial Creed.

HE must be rich whom I could love, 
His fortune clear must be, 
Whether in land or in the funds, 
'Tis all the same to me. 

He must be old whom I could love, 
Then he'll not plague me long; 
In sooth 'twill he a pleasant sight,
To see him borne along 

To where the croaking ravens lurk, 
And where the earth worms dwell: 
A widow's hood will suit my face,
And black becomes me well. 

And he must make a settlement, 
I'll have no man without; 
And when he writes his testament, 
He must not leave me out. 

Oh! such a man as this would suit 
Each wish I here express; 
If he should say, — Will you have me? 
I'll very soon say — Yes! ?
 
                       Holed up behind the whitewashed wooden slats
slung like ribs above the greed-begotten candy plaster-
papered noworlaters, holed up and far
from witches in the woods’ evergreen fringe,
horse chestnut brews, parents’ crow commotion or
robin squabble haranguing the fat
wide open always out there, I read for hours
on the red shag rug hearing market cry
and grave slope, catching the men through ages
of flint and full haggle in my 2 by 6 chamber,
heart bent on Blue Beard, the dead wives’
skeletons cantilevered to a door hook. Later,
hunkering down with amputee hangers,
catalogs, the bottle stash and jug wines,
Jim Beams too hiding with air, no air,
plus a stolen Joy of Sex circa 1974,
its pell mell positions and crouching
women, with the POV going scrap and rattle,
some theater of being a little less bright.
Thought I saw one night the million paired eyes
swinging upward, the hand me down generations
spelunking in holes, fine lineaments braved
by way of cream curd and lust and dictatorial DNA,
felt through overhead squib and carpet warp,
some full squat before the slate rock hearths,
more buried in strata of granites, igneous,
limestone, ash, the mind’s eye leveled
to one rectangle of light around the animal
who wants to know that it knows and say so,
lumbering down the long path, vanishing.
 
              to begin with life or stars
                                                              the spring as source or
                                                      season
                                         when to start—i love what you
                        said about the birds
                        as distance is required for attraction
                        & force keeps its distinctions
                        in a tall hull
                        called law—
                        clever in the style of depth in a painting
                        sumptuous for use, and briefly this
                        of fancy, pity, and devising,
                        wherefore as it is at the right door
                        make it language or rejoice
                        this is how you touch me in my other ghosts
                        & short of the occasion
                        just a frequent mist of atoms
                        all touching in the arms
                        like an error in the wish
The light’s seltzer, bubbles.
I said My lord. I thought
My god. O moonstruck. O gladracket. Barring
gravity, our knees could be forevering each other.

Barring leather, love is a world I’m praying
all my mothers’ joy back toward.

Elizabeth was my name. I’m writing this on all the trees like a wish.
I’m kissing every hem in sight.

We’re all hysterical & going nowhere together.

C’mon rapture. Let’s go bedazzling.

Nothing gets futured without its own spitshine
& I’m already not not not not not not miraculous.

beautiful, it is not. And if I’m being honest,

Glitz girls in the spackle. Teen climbed
The boughed over stair. Stole lace to begin again
In darkness, a fingering salt. Print
Delighted the line to lined
Pink. Was doll-sized, weighted out. Was flat-reaped sigh
And dollar bin plaid. Fridays we stayed in
Till in coughed through with dry heat. Men
Grew approximate in their longing for something to mine.
Sippy cup of burn, acrylic camel, and melting kohl
Was a hiding past boyish. We shone with miraculous
Droll. Don’t try to kiss me, she was always saying. Older
Than a watch, the girl who pays starch to hush
Meat. Gargantuan between grown and still us,
I leave her orange street, my wanting ode


my partner and I spend most of our time

on earth feeding one another citrus fruits

and enough strength to go on. Every morning

I pack them half a grapefruit and some sugar.

And they tell me it’s just sweet enough.

Dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,

I won’t. Get lucky. Get found.
But kegs run out, the hour brims,
the party flips its switches down,

his hips to mine, his arms around,
a song ends, and dark begins—
dear sip, dear shotgun, dear pound,
the party flips its switches down.
I remind her of a cookie in a dream she had of heaven or
hell—but which was it? Everything that happens in the
world has someone to say it’s their fault, repress it as
they may. The cutout in the cocktail bar wants to go
home with someone for once. The snakeskin hangs on
the gate like it’s a street corner, that each uttered “baby”
renews. Knowing can be a means to forgetting, also
We stand there as if the floor or wall is our companion
our fortress in trouble: mates a bit longer, keeping sex at
bay. Not everyone looks where they’re going or cares

where others are. They’re the rugged ones, though fleet
as moths when crossing a highway. Sometimes, despite
our own egos, we admire this, as if wise that the pattern
of the one ahead won’t ultimately save or brave us
Don’t rush. The star we wake to mightn’t always be
there, so we wander outside as if air were itself a prayer
or someone’s. Is that for me? addressing an ivy or a wet
plank, suddenly hungry. Tell me what happened to Peter
and Wendy and the loser with the hook for a hand. Was
it all alright in the end? They say time is nothing but it

takes the saying to make it so. To be the one is to
vanquish Sinatra, but also life (not that life is patriarchy)
Repress the possibility for the sake of staying young, as
around the bend a boat may contain the set of problems
that will have always been around. Attitudes to dancing
housework, contraception, ever music’s themes. A wall-
flower may remind themselves of wallpaper, peeling to
reveal a peasant who goes to sleep at dusk behind their
tux, but does that haunt you more than the possibility
of possessing truth? Is that what your glances are about?

I am so small walking on the beach
at night under the widening sky.
The wet sand quickens beneath my feet
and the waves thunder against the shore.

I am moving away from the boardwalk
with its colorful streamers of people
and the hotels with their blinking lights.
The wind sighs for hundreds of miles.

I am disappearing so far into the dark
I have vanished from sight.
I am a tiny seashell
that has secretly drifted ashore

and carries the sound of the ocean
surging through its body.
I am so small now no one can see me.
How can I be filled with such a vast love?
I take her in my hands
I open her gently
I part her pages
I stare at her words
I want her letters in my mouth
I run my hand down her spine
I love reading her
I love making love to her
I let her fall asleep in my lap
I pledge to sit upright in my coffin
as soon as the morgue-ice melts, and turn
a cheek grayer than this dusk. Kiss it
even if it doesn’t remind you of yesterday,
but let your tact disregard the breath
of a corpse mingled with the musk
you emptied on my breast. The belched outrage
from a belly domed in gas is simply
my way of saying, “Honey, I’m home.”
The carrion fly counting the fibers
in my nose is no heavenly harbinger.
Discount it as you’d discount a bird
on a cliché and fear nothing for there’s nothing
left to fear. Darling, I’m in no hurry.
Take your time in bringing me a rose
of that pinot we once praised to the sky
and let my tongue gad about in a warm
crimson bay. I swear to lie back forever
when the stylus roundly vexes a scratch
He was first a snake and was in love with her—a she-snake. And then he molted and after he molted he was a turtle and he met another she-turtle and fell in love with her. When he deshelled after years, he became a four-legged animal, black spots sprouting over his fur, and he fell for a leopard. He moved this way through the jungles, the savannas, the deserts, the skies, through the oceans, the air, the land and beneath it, changing and changing and meeting and falling in love with new she-species.
 
The lovers he left behind did not change. They were who they were. The same.
 
They were individualistic so to speak, but now they were also heartbroken and full of hate for him—the one who had left in the middle of, sometimes, passionate lovemaking.
 
They had no idea how it was to live so many lives in one life like him.

To take no breaks with rebirths from being mosquito to man.

Sometimes evolution and progress is so fast, blessings and curses are all mixed up, and One.
Forgive me.
I say to the wall.
My life is paper.
My jaws rust.

Wanderer: singing.
The sky is my home.
I throw roses into it
to color it red.

Stop: these roads
grow from me.
My journey must end
because my destinations
have ended.

Kneeling like a priest,
seeing the spherical eyes
of flies, my wish:
emptiness and sudden light.

Resurrection: I am dead
from it—the attempt to live
again.

It sings as me when I sleep:
the world dressed in yellow.
Never have songs
meant for me what they do
when you sing.

I leave you: haloes and clothes.
I leave you violently.
Like the wail of an exile.

Forget me: my truth.
My masterpiece is
my nonexistence.

Sunrise: unbreakable dawn.
I open your book.
It has no pages.


What will I take instead, you ask? Solenoid, ouroboros and African paayal: words we learnt from each other. Sputters of ??laughter over the misspelling of récipiendaire in my hundred-and-twenty-paged dissertation you went on to supervise. A first date with Patrice Chéreau’s Intimacy that left us bereft of voice but not touch. The spring lost in Paris, and retrieved in Rome: neonate but blithe and loud. Den Bosch and its soundless mornings, where even birds meditate. Dublin, yes, despite the disasters with missing kathak ankle bells and katana. Those shy cities that blush at dusk when the sun’s gaze fills with sudden desire. Others undressed by moonlight. The unsubsidized, incomplete report “Science and the Art of Rolling Balls and Other Machines.” All the lines of poetry you thought, and refused to write. The crackle and splutter of toast burning before breakfast. A tuneless humming muffled by shower curtains. Matinal half-hour radio-switch battles between RFI and BBC World. Sighting the smile on a natal cleft as you reach up for the tin of dark chocolate. Haroun and the Sea of Stories and Invisible Cities, more mine than yours: yes, I can play dirty on this. Canal Saint-Martin—but only the curve between the café Le Valmy and Pont de la Grange-aux-Belles. Koodiyattam as a birthday surprise when the gods left their paddy fields and invaded Paris, complete with cobalt and emerald cheeks, human woes and joys. The first encounter with Pina Bausch’s Café Müller. Every single one with her Rite of Spring. My fear of dying alone in a strange city at night. Copper and caramel: the two shades your gaze seems to traverse between dusk and daybreak. Other constellations: Pisces and Lynx and Phoenix. The ancient fleece jacket each would wear when the other was not around. All of Terry Pratchett’s Discworld books we owned together. The word together, as well. The fact you shared aloud in surprise at tea: a giraffe’s heart weighs an incredible 24 pounds. Today. Tomorrow. A spring tide of tomorrows  

—

Our granaries flowed with deposits of sweetest kernels
Like squirrels we were the saviors of a future
In winter’s clamp we siphoned liqueurs using deep-stemmed waterlilies
Returning to redeem we found brittle rock-sugar
Clouded air traps
Ice spikes
Fossil prints

—

Whenever I open my mouth: crater

Blisters I take for moonwalking shoes

Sentries out the front
Slips at the backdoor

The bloat floats

Fatwrapped
Fleafeeling

—

Two people have a third person between them
One of them is always responsible for her disappearance

Parched beehives in their stomachs they look everywhere

Lightning and smoke form duration in the I Ching clouds
She won’t say shoo
We must be
the inviolate
petals, always
queering to-
ward the sun,
must be water
on the lips of
flaming cities,
quenching
the husbands,
insatiable. These
days the abdomen
blossoms, but
we must be
boneless, edible
fish. We must
beg for bouquets
for absent sons.
This is how we
know devotion:
listening to lovers
sleep, breathing
like monster trucks,
wanting to soothe
them when the dream
is done. We march
the sinking avenues,
finger the curls
at the baby’s neck,
hanging from
the brink at
office hour,
gulping Xanax
in their white
oblong shells.
Cities can sleep
but we can never.
Vigilant animals
on our hands and
knees, asking for
Each temple is an offering made to the gods
by giving them a home.
Did you ever feel this. Astonished
by the blood drawn from
your arms when you took a step forward
and the air scraped you.

Maybe you think peace. Think it
as a floral carpet, a persistent scent
that is supposed to be
a memory you treasure. Only
it was put there by someone else.

When the sun hits
it feels like something.
Someone cooks soup.
You love a person you envy.
And the emotions wash
into a teacup
and you drink them
and your teeth are storm-stained.

If there were a wave,
blue-black, flooding lives out,
spinning each person
and the next
and their needs
together as if they were fabrics
in a laundry machine,
could I ever trust it? If I touch
and you forget
you have borders against nature.
We’re floating somewhere
in a primordial pool.
And I’ve got you, and I’ve got you.

An inward realization can only be achieved
by draining out your wealth and strength. So he went on
Another building rampage.
?“A world conquer campaign,” as my brother used to say.
Drew a straight line across a map
And let the priest and the architect connect
the fact that often it was a Queen
on whose insistence these stone gardens were built.

If I had known      all those     days
to listen deep   into myself      so that you

would begin      to hear      me,      I’d sooner
soak      the decibels      of      your cells

into  the exhale  of my      embrace.
            A scorning within       is within

                coming back      to scorn.
A rose quartz promise      lifted into

the world   is the world      coming back
                          to surrender      its love.

Even after      I took my health
into a vineyard      of hawks,

I could not break myself from caring
but only     to seek you,      find you,

            whisper into your palm:
you are not lost,      you won’t be lost.
What’s Godhead—
now standing upright,
fecundity no less
I tell you more about.

Phases of the moon, you see:
an auspicious moment I’ve
come to believe in with
Shiva or some other deity.

What Greece from antiquity
bestowed upon us with an
outsider named Sikander—
Alexander the Great going

to the Indus Valley but not
ancient Rome, I presume to
know less about; then it’s
Parvati, consort of Shiva,

being on the diurnal stage
as I dwell on enlightenment—
fires burning and smoke
rising from the ground.

Sandalwood, the ghee of life
with avatars coming closer,
and I will recite mantras
when Shiva looks back at me

from the corner of his eye
as I pretend I am in some
other place like Rishikesh,
close to the Ganges, but

here by the Rideau River—
this North with celestial fires,
making promises to myself
from long ago.
Then, the smaller, more regular ones: week-end washing, the family of filthy plates and pans and casseroles somersaulting well past burnished wooden spigots to be the first to greet me when arriving at your ancient garret in Angers by the last TGV, just grazing past midnight and the lone, last tram—with that recurrent, half-annoyed, half-amused, thought: would you first run out of copper and steel and stone, space in your cavernous sink or the resolve never to soap and scrub and rinse (drying’s all right)?  
 
Happier, low-maintenance rites as well: molten, dark hot chocolate brunches to celebrate impending surgery, yes, “celebrate” the verb we’d adopted as shaggy, wet-nosed mongrel, just right for consolation. The nights in hospital, where I knew—each time—you woke to place quiet fingers and parse the storm warnings within my breath. Then, the weeks of binge-relishing Wong Kar-wai films—from Ashes of Time to 2046 (we as “We” would not live to see My Blueberry Nights and Norah Jones)—for sustenance through rebirth and recovery, till I rose, irrevocably in love with Patrice Chéreau after Son  frère,  and,  it  is  true,  seldom  returned.  
 
All these and a few, more diffident, others went
missing in that one, endless, afternoon of our
remaindering, slipped away—unnoticed—
amidst the naming, the labeling, the
allotting, the packing. They could
have fled through the fissures
in the kitchen wall, or rolled
down cracks in the floor-
boards—and some, I
reckon, even threw
themselves out
of windows
we’d left
open.
            throb—

you do not know me if you graze
my saber & my light
but not the wound I guard.        1 accuses another
of everything but love.        1 demands

cameras, safety whistles, glue
to hold herself together
against the brutal gaze.      we only need
these awkward straps, heat-slick dildos,

Kutchi mirrors, concentric abstract
aurae of this crescent moon
sweeping our bodies w/ cool white
reflected & deflected light

because of what we’ve lost or left
because the language is disaster
because our species has forgotten
acute angles,

triple dream projected
—inner, outer, secret—
on empty, aching
temple walls.        afterward

the residue.      what isn’t conscious
throngs toward the surface:
10,000 joy-and-sorrow fishes
crashing into air.
Source: Poetry (July/August 2019)

He stood at the back of ?his old Church, wanting to join in with the congregation.
Everyone followed the priest,
I confess to almighty God, and to you my brothers and sisters, that
I have sinned through my own fault in my thoughts and in my words?...
He looked for her. The back of many black-haired heads made
his stomach upset. Heads all bent.

He glimpsed her thick plait curled on her shoulder by
the end of the Penitential Act. Moving, he saw her.
Always in a sari. Always with her mother.

Their son sat up on the altar, his shoes shinier
than all the other boys. His mother would have shone
them with Kiwi shoe polish and an old brush. The sound
would wake him. She must be watching him to keep
his face still. Her son on the altar at Morning Mass.

Their daughter was hand-in-hand with mother and
grandmother. Her two plaits shone with oil. After
the shoes, her mother would have woken and washed
her for Mass. She would tell the small girl Stop crying!
while tightly plaiting her thick-oiled hair.

He left before Communion started, walking down the road to the bus stop.

Pull down the crows from the sky
Piya, summer’s blood is barely dry
What is a poem if it cannot try
To call you a ****ing ***** or die
Whispering in your arms, this lie
When Kabira met Keats, he said:
Our poems make canopies overhead

Always

Or, beloved, if I told you
We are words
And the spaces between us
Make poetry
Would you not say
Piya, why the fuss?
We knew it was thus

Will it ask
 If you want definitions, here is one: a lover is one who waits.
Beauty is brief and violent
like the white thunderbolt
of Nilgiri slow and sudden
braided like her hair
one morning was a cluster
of grapes hung beside each
ear maybe it comes from where
hunger the voices of children
come breaking their way
to my heart the stones
my feet which are light
and heavy from walking
that path full and swift
the river flows eroding
the banks with its sinuous
desire gentle and unkind
the days the years boulders
tossed by a giant down the hill
we must climb to the sudden
sinuous blue
The next part, the part where definitions are unwoven and the threads laid bare, can be left to Barthes, Roland, who said everything about it that needs to be said. And for what cannot be (and there are still some of those things) there are films, which—no matter what the structuralists say—are not to be read.

There was a girl who sat every evening at a particular table, hoping it was close enough to where the boys sat to make it appear a natural veering off when (if) he came to sit at it, opposite her; but not close enough to make her seem desperate.

Not always was her waiting played out as gestures of solitude. Other people gave her company. There was nothing in her face that could be read as signs of biding. This did not mean that she knew her time was up. This did not mean that she ceased to wonder and hope and despair and curse.

This is where Barthes got the story of the mandarin wrong, the one who pined for the courtesan who had said that after the 100th night of waiting, she would be his. What Barthes did was to report the mandarin’s departure on the penultimate night. He didn’t say how, on the night the mandarin left, the courtesan had made up her mind to tell him he’d waited enough, he could come in and

instead
the question
            tattooed
on our skin?
 At the railway station I ask
if there’s a train to where you are.

I’m told there is one but it’s left already,
so has tomorrow’s and the day after’s.

Somewhere in the trees, painted in
degrees of green, the morning

paint still wet, a magpie robin sets up its
musical kit. You hear it in your garden,

I in mine. At night, like a colicky child,
our old bones tired, desire keeps us awake.

Put it to sleep if you can, I’ll do
the same, and for now let’s forget

the railway station. Parking’s not easy there,
the trains keep to no time.

Until dirt
Is it true that Troy lived life without a
written form before the Greeks invaded
with their horse, or did I learn that from a poem?
Either way, is that not how affection
ends, married or devoted to motion?
 
The upper hand forgetting how it felt
to feed the token, the brass first held in
the fingers then dropped into the subway vestibule.
This daily verb and its prescription cost,
on the rise from root to roof, would have you
 
be an estimate of man, could convince
you to never love another or another as he goes.
& if my looks one day be gone, my mood
will excuse my bad behavior. O trophies
of action, between which occasions suffocate,
 
& which boil into vapor, I should have seen X coming.
Not that anything would change the case, or more
Closely approximate the correct answer, but with the lawn
exposed I would not have to wonder when
it is you enter and when it is you leave.
 
            fills
my grave, you say.
 
Call it wait
            or rest—the stare,
the lunge back
 
into what we can’t
            swim—
Another shore now—
 
how our arms flail
            the joints’
acidic burn—
 
A hunger     
            unbeknownst
to us, a flame cupped
 
in skin—earth
           turning us
toward a thin stream
 
of self—Oh anticipant,
            Oh dear
loving Lord—to hold
 
a burden like a need
            and let
a new life begin.
 
   
LITTLE Ellie sits alone 
  ’Mid the beeches of a meadow   
    By a stream-side on the grass,  
And the trees are showering down 
  Doubles of their leaves in shadow         5
    On her shining hair and face.   
 
She has thrown her bonnet by, 
  And her feet she has been dipping 
    In the shallow water’s flow: 
Now she holds them nakedly         10
  In her hands, all sleek and dripping,   
    While she rocketh to and fro.   
 
Little Ellie sits alone,   
  And the smile she softly uses  
    Fills the silence like a speech         15
While she thinks what shall be done,   
  And the sweetest pleasure chooses 
    For her future within reach. 
 
Little Ellie in her smile  
  Chooses—“I will have a lover,          20
    Riding on a steed of steeds: 
He shall love me without guile,  
  And to him I will discover  
    The swan’s nest among the reeds.   
 
“And the steed shall be red-roan,           25
  And the lover shall be noble,  
    With an eye that takes the breath: 
And the lute he plays upon 
  Shall strike ladies into trouble, 
    As his sword strikes men to death.         30
 
“And the steed it shall be shod  
  All in silver, housed in azure,   
    And the mane shall swim the wind;  
And the hoofs along the sod   
  Shall flash onward and keep measure,         35
    Till the shepherds look behind. 
 
“But my lover will not prize  
  All the glory that he rides in,   
    When he gazes in my face: 
He will say, ‘O Love, thine eyes         40
  Build the shrine my soul abides in,  
    And I kneel here for thy grace!’   
 
“Then, ay, then he shall kneel low, 
  With the red-roan steed anear him 
    Which shall seem to understand,         45
Till I answer, ‘Rise and go!  
  For the world must love and fear him 
    Whom I gift with heart and hand.’  
 
“Then he will arise so pale,  
  I shall feel my own lips tremble          50
    With a yes I must not say,   
Nathless maiden-brave, ‘Farewell,’  
  I will utter, and dissemble—   
    ‘Light to-morrow with to-day!’  
 
“Then he’ll ride among the hills         55
  To the wide world past the river, 
    There to put away all wrong; 
To make straight distorted wills,   
  And to empty the broad quiver  
    Which the wicked bear along.         60
 
“Three times shall a young foot-page   
  Swim the stream and climb the mountain  
    And kneel down beside my feet—  
‘Lo, my master sends this gage,  
  Lady, for thy pity’s counting!         65
    What wilt thou exchange for it?’   
 
“And the first time I will send  
  A white rosebud for a guerdon, 
    And the second time, a glove;   
But the third time—I may bend         70
  From my pride, and answer—’Pardon,   
    If he comes to take my love.’   
 
“Then the young foot-page will run, 
  Then my lover will ride faster,   
    Till he kneeleth at my knee:         75
‘I am a duke’s eldest son, 
  Thousand serfs do call me master, 
    But, O Love, I love but thee!’  
  
SEVEN maidens ’neath the midnight   
  Stand near the river-sea,   
Whose water sweepeth white around   
  The shadow of the tree.  
The moon and earth are face to face,           5
  And earth is slumbering deep;  
The wave-voice seems the voice of dreams  
  That wander through her sleep. 
                The river floweth on.  
 
What bring they ’neath the midnight,           10
  Beside the river-sea? 
They bring the human heart wherein  
  No nightly calm can be,— 
That droppeth never with the wind,  
  Nor drieth with the dew:         15
O, calm it, God! Thy calm is broad  
  To cover spirits, too.   
                The river floweth on.  
 
The maidens lean them over 
  The waters, side by side,           20
And shun each other’s deepening eyes,  
  And gaze adown the tide: 
For each within a little boat 
  A little lamp hath put,  
And heaped for freight some lily’s weight         25
  Or scarlet rose half shut.  
                The river floweth on.  
 
Of a shell of cocoa carven,   
  Each little boat is made:   
Each carries a lamp, and carries a flower,           30
  And carries a hope unsaid.  
And when the boat hath carried the lamp   
  Unquenched, till out of sight, 
The maidens are sure that love will endure,— 
  But love will fail with light.         35
                The river floweth on.  
 
Why, all the stars are ready  
  To symbolize the soul,   
The stars untroubled by the wind,   
  Unwearied as they roll;          40
And yet the soul by instinct sad 
  Reverts to symbols low,— 
To that small flame whose very name,   
  Breathed o’er it, shakes it so!   
                The river floweth on.          45
 
Six boats are on the river,   
  Seven maidens on the shore, 
While still above them steadfastly  
  The stars shine evermore.   
Go, little boats, go soft and safe,         50
  And guard the symbol spark! 
The boats aright go safe and bright 
  Across the waters dark.  
                The river floweth on.  
 
The maiden Luti watcheth           55
  Where onwardly they float.  
That look in her dilating eyes   
  Might seem to drive her boat;  
Her eyes still mark the constant fire, 
  And kindling unawares         60
That hopeful while she lets a smile 
  Creep silent through her prayers. 
                The river floweth on.  
 
The smile,—where hath it wandered?  
  She riseth from her knee,           65
She holds her dark, wet locks away,—   
  There is no light to see!   
She cries a quick and bitter cry,   
  “Nuleeni, launch me thine!  
We must have light abroad to-night,         70
  For all the wreck of mine.” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
“I do remember watching 
  Beside this river-bed,   
When on my childish knee was laid           75
  My dying father’s head.  
I turned mine own, to keep the tears   
  From falling on his face,—  
What doth it prove when death and love 
  Choose out the selfsame place?”           80
                The river floweth on.  
 
“They say the dead are joyful 
  The death-change here receiving.  
Who say,—all me! who dare to say 
  Where joy comes to the living?         85
Thy boat, Nuleeni! look not sad,—   
  Light up the waters rather! 
I weep no faithless lover where  
  I wept a loving father.” 
                The river floweth on.          90
 
“My heart foretold his falsehood 
  Ere my little boat grew dim:   
And though I closed mine eyes to dream 
  That one last dream of him, 
They shall not now be wet to see         95
  The shining vision go:   
From earth’s cold love I look above 
  To the holy house of snow.” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
“Come thou,—thou never knewest           100
  A grief, that thou shouldst fear one!   
Thou wearest still the happy look   
  That shines beneath a dear one!   
Thy humming-bird is in the sun,  
  Thy cuckoo in the grove,         105
And all the three broad worlds, for thee  
  Are full of wandering love.”   
                The river floweth on.  
 
“Why, maiden, dost thou loiter?  
  What secret wouldst thou cover?           110
That peepul cannot hide thy boat,   
  And I can guess thy lover:  
I heard thee sob his name in sleep,—   
  It was a name I knew,—   
Come, little maid, be not afraid,           115
  But let us prove him true!” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
The little maiden cometh,  
  She cometh shy and slow; 
I ween she seeth through her lids,          120
  They drop adown so low:  
Her tresses meet her small bare feet,— 
  She stands and speaketh naught,   
Yet blusheth red, as if she said 
  The name she only thought.          125
                The river floweth on.  
 
She knelt beside the water,   
  She lighted up the flame,   
And o’er her youthful forehead’s calm  
  The fitful radiance came:           130
“Go, little boat, go, soft and safe,   
  And guard the symbol spark!”   
Soft, safe, doth float the little boat 
  Across the waters dark.  
                The river floweth on.          135
 
Glad tears her eyes have blinded;   
  The light they cannot reach:   
She turneth with that sudden smile  
  She learnt before her speech,— 
“I do not hear his voice! the tears         140
  Have dimmed my light away!  
But the symbol light will last to-night,  
  The love will last for aye.”   
                The river floweth on.  
 
Then Luti spake behind her,—          145
  Outspake she bitterly:   
“By the symbol light that lasts to-night, 
  Wilt vow a vow to me?”   
Nuleeni gazeth up her face,—  
  Soft answer maketh she:          150
“By loves that last when lights are past, 
  I vow that vow to thee!” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
An earthly look had Luti   
  Though her voice was deep as prayer,—           155
“The rice is gathered from the plains  
  To cast upon thine hair; 
But when he comes, his marriage-band   
  Around thy neck to throw,   
Thy bride-smile raise to meet his gaze,           160
And whisper,—There is one betrays,  
  When Luti suffers woe.”  
                The river floweth on.  
 
“And when in seasons after,   
  Thy little bright-faced son         165
Shall kneel against thy knee and ask   
  What deeds his sire hath done, 
Press deeper down thy mother-smile  
  His glossy curls among,— 
View deep his pretty childish eyes,         170
And whisper,—There is none denies,  
  When Luti speaks of wrong.” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
Nuleeni looked in wonder   
  Yet softly answered she,—           175
“By loves that last when lights are past, 
  I vowed that vow to thee.   
But why glads it thee that a bride-day be 
  By a word of woe defiled?   
That a word of wrong take the cradle-song         180
  From the ear of a sinless child?” 
  “Why,” Luti said, and her laugh was dread, 
  And her eyes dilated wild,— 
“That the fair new love may her bridegroom prove,  
  And the father shame the child.”          185
                The river floweth on.  
 THE OLD idea of romance: The country boy goes to the city, marries his employer’s daughter, enslaves some hundreds of his fellow humans, gets rich, and leaves a public library to his home town.   1
  The new idea of romance: To undo some of the mischief done by the old idea of romance.    2
  
1893

THY face is far from this our war,  
  Our call and counter-cry,   
I shall not find Thee quick and kind,  
  Nor know Thee till I die.   
Enough for me in dreams to see           5
  And touch Thy garments’ hem:   
Thy feet have trod so near to God   
  I may not follow them!   
 
Through wantonness if men profess   
  They weary of Thy parts,         10
E’en let them die at blasphemy   
  And perish with their arts; 
But we that love, but we that prove 
  Thine excellence august, 
While we adore, discover more         15
  Thee perfect, wise, and just.  
 
Since spoken word Man’s Spirit stirred 
  Beyond his belly-need,   
What is is Thine of fair design  
  In Thought and Craft and Deed.         20
Each stroke aright of toil and fight,  
  That was and that shall be, 
And hope too high wherefore we die, 
  Has birth and worth in Thee.   
 
Who holds by Thee hath Heaven in fee           25
  To gild his dross thereby,  
And knowledge sure that he endure   
  A child until he die— 
For to make plain that man’s disdain   
  Is but new Beauty’s birth—          30
For to possess in singleness  
  The joy of all the earth.   
 
As Thou didst teach all lovers speech  
  And Life all mystery, 
So shalt Thou rule by every school          35
  Till life and longing die,  
Who wast or yet the Lights were set,   
  A whisper in the Void,   
Who shalt be sung through planets young   
  When this is clean destroyed.          40
 
Beyond the bounds our staring rounds,  
  Across the pressing dark,   
The children wise of outer skies 
  Look hitherward and mark 
A light that shifts, a glare that drifts,         45
  Rekindling thus and thus,   
Not all forlorn, for Thou hast borne   
  Strange tales to them of us.   
 
Time hath no tide but must abide 
  The servant of Thy will;         50
Tide hath no time, for to Thy rhyme 
  The ranging stars stand still— 
Regent of spheres that lock our fears  
  Our hopes invisible,  
Oh ’t was certes at Thy decrees          55
  We fashioned Heaven and Hell!  
 
Pure Wisdom hath no certain path 
  That lacks thy morning-eyne,   
And Captains bold by Thee controlled   
  Most like to Gods design.           60
Thou art the Voice to kingly boys   
  To lift them through the fight,   
And Comfortress of Unsuccess, 
  To give the Dead good-night.   
 
A veil to draw ’twixt God His Law           65
  And Man’s infirmity,  
A shadow kind to dumb and blind  
  The shambles where we die;  
A rule to trick th’ arithmetic,  
  Too base, of leaguing odds—         70
The spur of trust, the curb of lust,   
  Thou handmaid of the Gods!  
 
O Charity, all patiently   
  Abiding wrack and scaith!   
O Faith, that meets ten thousand cheats           75
  Yet drops no jot of faith!  
Devil and brute Thou dost transmute 
  To higher, lordlier show,   
Who art in sooth that lovely Truth  
  The careless angels know!           80
 
Thy face is far from this our war,  
  Our call and counter-cry,   
I may not find Thee quick and kind, 
  Nor know Thee till I die.   
 
Yet may I look with heart unshook           85
  On blow brought home or missed—   
Yet may I hear with equal ear 
  The clarions down the List; 
Yet set my lance above mischance 
  And ride the barriere—           90
Oh, hit or miss, how little ’t is,  
  My Lady is not there!
“Thou flowest still, O river, 
  Thou flowest ’neath the moon,— 
Thy lily hath not changed a leaf.   
  Thy charméd lute a tune!         190
He mixed his voice with thine,—and his 
  Was all I heard around;  
But now, beside his chosen bride,   
  I hear the river’s sound.”  
                The river floweth on.          195
 
“I gaze upon her beauty 
  Through the tresses that enwreathe it:  
The light above thy wave is hers,—  
  My rest, alone beneath it.  
O, give me back the dying look           200
  My father gave thy water!   
Give back! and let a little love 
  O’erwatch his weary daughter!” 
                The river floweth on.  
 
“Give back!” she hath departed,—         205
  The word is wandering with her,   
And the stricken maidens hear afar  
  The step and cry together.  
Frail symbols? None are frail enow  
  For mortal joys to borrow!          210
While bright doth float Nuleeni’s boat,   
  She weepeth, dark with sorrow. 
                The river floweth on.  
 
“He will kiss me on the mouth 
  Then, and lead me as a lover           80
    Through the crowds that praise his deeds:   
And, when soul-tied by one troth,   
  Unto him I will discover 
    That swan’s nest among the reeds.” 
 
Little Ellie, with her smile          85
  Not yet ended, rose up gaily,  
    Tied the bonnet, donned the shoe,  
And went homeward, round a mile, 
  Just to see, as she did daily, 
    What more eggs were with the two.          90
 
Pushing through the elm-tree copse, 
  Winding up the stream, light-hearted,   
    Where the osier pathway leads,  
Past the boughs she stoops—and stops.  
  Lo, the wild swan had deserted,           95
    And a rat had knawed the reeds! 
 
Ellie went home sad and slow. 
  If she found the lover ever,   
    With his red-roan steed of steeds, 
Sooth I know not; but I know          100
  She could never show him—never,   
    That swan’s nest among the reeds!  
 
FAIN 1 would I change that note  
To which fond Love hath charm’d me  
Long long ago to sing by rote,   
Fancying that that harm’d me: 
Yet when this thought doth come,         5
‘Love is the perfect sum   
    Of all delight,’ 
I have no other choice  
Either for pen or voice 
    To sing or write.           10
 
O Love! they wrong thee much  
That say thy sweet is bitter, 
When thy rich fruit is such   
As nothing can be sweeter. 
Fair house of joy and bliss,          15
Where truest pleasure is,  
    I do adore thee: 
I know thee what thou art, 
I serve thee with my heart,   
    And fall before thee.
I LOVE to steal awhile away   
  From every cumbering care,  
And spend the hours of setting day  
  In humble, grateful prayer. 
 
I love, in solitude, to shed          5
  The penitential tear; 
And all His promises to plead,   
  When none but God can hear. 
 
I love to think on mercies past, 
  And future good implore;         10
And all my cares and sorrows cast   
  On Him whom I adore.  
 
I love, by faith, to take a view 
  Of brighter scenes in heaven;  
The prospect doth my strength renew,           15
  While here by tempests driven. 
 
Thus, when life’s toilsome day is o’er,   
  May its departing ray 
Be calm as this impressive hour, 
  And lead to endless day.

And so one day, as ever of old,  
  Hands out, they hurried, knee to knee;         10
On fire to cling and kiss and hold  
  And, in the other’s eyes, to see  
  Each his own tiny face,  
  And in that long embrace 
  Feel lip and breast grow warm         15
  To breast and lip and arm.  
  
So knee to knee they sped again, 
  And laugh to laugh they ran, I’m told,  
Across the streets of Hell…   
  And then         20
  They suddenly felt the wind blow cold,  
  And knew, so closely pressed,  
  Chill air on lip and breast,   
  And, with a sick surprise,  
  The emptiness of eyes.

THE hunchèd camels of the night   
Trouble the bright    
And silver waters of the moon.    
The Maiden of the Morn will soon  
Through Heaven stray and sing,            5
Star gathering.    
  
Now while the dark about our loves is strewn,    
Light of my dark, blood of my heart, O come!  
And night will catch her breath up, and be dumb.    
  
Leave thy father, leave thy mother    10
And thy brother;   
Leave the black tents of thy tribe apart!  
Am I not thy father and thy brother,    
And thy mother?    
And thou—what needest with thy tribe's black tents   15
Who hast the red pavilion of my heart?
    Foul evil of the joys he may not share!  
There is no stain in love; the only sin   
    Is his who scorns the garb of love to wear. 
 
Sweet home of passion, nest of mated hearts  
    Quick throbbing each to each in wild desire;           10
Till swift, resistless, through each pulse and vein   
    Leaps quivering forth love’s own magnetic fire.   
 
O wretched, empty lives, that never knew  
    The thrill of love’s ecstatic, fierce embrace! 
When, lips to lips tight pressed, heart beats to heart,          15
    With hot, sharp breaths; and love-fired limbs enlace.   
 
Thy sweet will, love, be done! From that blest couch  
    Fond lovers may not rise unsatisfied; 
Denied the crowning act of perfect bliss, 
    When being into being seems to glide.         20
 
Rest, loving hearts, in blissful lassitude,  
    Still tightly clasped in soft, encircling arms.   
Sleep, sweetly sleep, to wake and taste again   
    The maddening richness of each other’s charms. 
 
Love’s hour is brief, but crowned with wealth beyond          25
    The brightest splendors of the loveless years. 
The thrones of monarchs and the seats of gods   
    Shrink all to naught in love’s bright smiles or tears.  
 
Best home of love! To many an amorous fray   
    We vow thy snowy sheets to dedicate;          30
That bards to come, in oft-repeated strains, 
    Thy perfect hours may long commemorate.
The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,         15
The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes   
Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening, 
Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,   
Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,   
Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,          20
And seeing that it was a soft October night, 
Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.   
 WHAT meaneth this! when I lie alone   
I toss, I turn, I sigh, I groan; 
My bed me seems as hard as stone:   
        What means this?   
I sigh, I plain continually;          5
The clothes that on my bed do lie,  
Always me think they lie awry;   
        What means this?   
In slumbers oft for fear I quake;   
For heat and cold I burn and shake;         10
For lack of sleep my head doth ake; 
        What means this?   
A mornings then when I do rise,  
I turn unto my wonted guise,  
All day after muse and devise;           15
        What means this?   
And if perchance by me there pass,  
She, unto whom I sue for grace,  
The cold blood forsaketh my face;   
        What means this?           20
But if I sit near her by,  
With loud voice my heart doth cry,  
And yet my mouth is dumb and dry;   
        What means this?   
To ask for help no heart I have;         25
My tongue doth fail what I should crave;  
Yet inwardly I rage and rave; 
        What means this?   
Thus have I passed many a year,  
And many a day, though nought appear,          30
But most of that that most I fear;  
        What means this?
And indeed there will be time 
For the yellow smoke that slides along the street, 
Rubbing its back upon the window panes;           25
There will be time, there will be time 
To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet; 
There will be time to murder and create,  
And time for all the works and days of hands 
That lift and drop a question on your plate;         30
Time for you and time for me, 
And time yet for a hundred indecisions,   
And for a hundred visions and revisions,  
Before the taking of a toast and tea.  
 
In the room the women come and go           35
Talking of Michelangelo.   
 
And indeed there will be time 
To wonder, “Do I dare?” and, “Do I dare?” 
Time to turn back and descend the stair,  
With a bald spot in the middle of my hair—           40
(They will say: “How his hair is growing thin!”)   
My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,  
My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin—   
(They will say: “But how his arms and legs are thin!”)   
Do I dare           45
Disturb the universe?   
In a minute there is time  
For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse. 
 
For I have known them all already, known them all: 
Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,          50
I have measured out my life with coffee spoons; 
I know the voices dying with a dying fall 
Beneath the music from a farther room. 
  So how should I presume? 
 
And I have known the eyes already, known them all—         55
The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,   
And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,   
When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,  
Then how should I begin 
To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?         60
  And how should I presume?   
 
And I have known the arms already, known them all— 
Arms that are braceleted and white and bare  
(But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!) 
Is it perfume from a dress         65
That makes me so digress?  
Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.   
  And should I then presume?  
  And how should I begin?
.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .
Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets          70
And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes 
Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows?… 
 
I should have been a pair of ragged claws 
Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.
.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .
And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!         75
Smoothed by long fingers,  
Asleep … tired … or it malingers,   
Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me. 
Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,   
Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?          80
But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,   
Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,   
I am no prophet—and here’s no great matter;  
I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker, 
And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,         85
And in short, I was afraid.   
 
And would it have been worth it, after all,  
After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,   
Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,   
Would it have been worth while,          90
To have bitten off the matter with a smile,  
To have squeezed the universe into a ball 
To roll it toward some overwhelming question,   
To say: “I am Lazarus, come from the dead,   
Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all”—          95
If one, settling a pillow by her head, 
  Should say: “That is not what I meant at all; 
  That is not it, at all.” 
 
And would it have been worth it, after all,  
Would it have been worth while,          100
After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets, 
After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the floor—   
And this, and so much more?—  
It is impossible to say just what I mean! 
But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:          105
Would it have been worth while   
If one, settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl, 
And turning toward the window, should say:   
  “That is not it at all,  
  That is not what I meant, at all.”
.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .
        110
No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;   
Am an attendant lord, one that will do 
To swell a progress, start a scene or two,   
Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,   
Deferential, glad to be of use,          115
Politic, cautious, and meticulous;  
Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;  
At times, indeed, almost ridiculous—   
Almost, at times, the Fool.   
 
I grow old … I grow old …          120
I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled. 
 
Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?   
I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.  
I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.   
 
I do not think that they will sing to me.         125
 
I have seen them riding seaward on the waves 
Combing the white hair of the waves blown back  
When the wind blows the water white and black.  
 
We have lingered in the chambers of the sea  
By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown           130
Till human voices wake us, and we drown.


LOVE bade me welcome; yet my soul drew back,  
      Guilty of dust and sin.  
But quick-eyed Love, observing me grow slack  
      From my first entrance in,  
Drew nearer to me, sweetly questioning          5
      If I lack'd anything.    
 
'A guest,' I answer'd, 'worthy to be here:'   
     Love said, 'You shall be he.'   
'I, the unkind, ungrateful? Ah, my dear,   
      I cannot look on Thee.'   10
Love took my hand and smiling did reply,   
      'Who made the eyes but I?'  
 
'Truth, Lord; but I have marr'd them: let my shame  
      Go where it doth deserve.'  
'And know you not,' says Love, 'Who bore the blame?'    15
      'My dear, then I will serve.'  
'You must sit down,' says Love, 'and taste my meat.'   
      So I did sit and eat.    

MY Spectre around me night and day  
Like a wild beast guards my way; 
My Emanation far within 
Weeps incessantly for my sin. 
 
‘A fathomless and boundless deep,           5
There we wander, there we weep;  
On the hungry craving wind 
My Spectre follows thee behind.  
 
‘He scents thy footsteps in the snow   
Wheresoever thou dost go,         10
Thro’ the wintry hail and rain.  
When wilt thou return again?  
 
’Dost thou not in pride and scorn   
Fill with tempests all my morn,  
And with jealousies and fears        15
Fill my pleasant nights with tears? 
 
‘Seven of my sweet loves thy knife  
Has bereavèd of their life.   
Their marble tombs I built with tears, 
And with cold and shuddering fears.        20
 
‘Seven more loves weep night and day   
Round the tombs where my loves lay, 
And seven more loves attend each night 
Around my couch with torches bright.   
 
‘And seven more loves in my bed         25
Crown with wine my mournful head,   
Pitying and forgiving all  
Thy transgressions great and small. 
 
‘When wilt thou return and view  
My loves, and them to life renew?          30
When wilt thou return and live?  
When wilt thou pity as I forgive?’  
 
‘O’er my sins thou sit and moan: 
Hast thou no sins of thy own? 
O’er my sins thou sit and weep,         35
And lull thy own sins fast asleep.  
 
‘What transgressions I commit 
Are for thy transgressions fit.  
They thy harlots, thou their slave; 
And my bed becomes their grave.         40
 
‘Never, never, I return:   
Still for victory I burn.  
Living, thee alone I’ll have; 
And when dead I’ll be thy grave. 
 
‘Thro’ the Heaven and Earth and Hell          45
Thou shalt never, quell:   
I will fly and thou pursue:   
Night and morn the flight renew.’   
 
‘Poor, pale, pitiable form 
That I follow in a storm;         50
Iron tears and groans of lead 
Bind around my aching head.   
  
LOVE, 1 lift me up upon thy golden wings  
From this base world unto thy heaven’s hight,   
Where I may see those admirable things 
Which there thou workest by thy soveraine might,   
Farre above feeble reach of earthly sight,           5
That I thereof an heavenly hymne may sing 
Unto the God of Love, high heaven’s King. 
 
Many lewd layes (ah! woe is me the more!) 
In praise of that mad fit which fooles call Love,  
I have in th’ heate of youth made heretofore,           10
That in light wits did loose affection move: 
But all these follies now I do reprove,   
And turned have the tenor of my string,   
The heavenly prayses of true Love to sing.   
 
And ye, that wont with greedy vaine desire           15
To reade my fault, and, wondring at my flame,   
To warme yourselves at my wide sparckling fire, 
Sith now that heat is quenched, quench my blame,   
And in her ashes shrowd my dying shame;   
For who my passed follies now pursewes,           20
Beginnes his owne, and my old fault renewes. 
 
BEFORE THIS WORLD’S GREAT FRAME, in which al things   
Are now contained, found any being-place, 
Ere flitting Time could wag his eyas wings   
About that mightie bound which doth embrace          25
The rolling spheres, and parts their houres by space, 
That High Eternall Powre, which now doth move   
In all these things, mov’d in its selfe by love.   
 
It lov’d it selfe, because it selfe was faire;  
(For fair is lov’d;) and of it self begot         30
Like to it selfe his eldest Sonne and Heire, 
Eternall, pure, and voide of sinfull blot,   
The firstling of His ioy, in whom no iot  
Of love’s dislike or pride was to be found,  
Whom He therefore with equall honour crown’d.           35
 
With Him he raign’d, before all time prescribed,   
In endlesse glorie and immortall might,   
Together with that Third from them derived,  
Most wise, most holy, most almightie Spright!   
Whose kingdome’s throne no thoughts of earthly wight          40
Can comprehend, much lesse my trembling verse   
With equall words can hope it to reherse. 
 
Yet, O most blessed Spright! pure lampe of light,  
Eternall spring of grace and wisedom trew,   
Vouchsafe to shed into my barren spright          45
Some little drop of thy celestiall dew,   
That may my rymes with sweet infuse embrew,  
And give me words equall unto my thought, 
To tell the marveiles by thy mercie wrought. 
 
Yet being pregnant still with powrefull grace,          50
And full of fruitfull Love, that loves to get   
Things like himselfe, and to enlarge his race,  
His second brood, though not of powre so great, 
Yet full of beautie, next He did beget 
An infinite increase of angels bright,         55
All glistring glorious in their Maker’s light.  
 
To them the heaven’s illimitable hight 
(Not this round heaven, which we from hence behold,   
Adorn’d with thousand lamps of burning light,   
And with ten thousand gemmes of shyning gold,           60
He gave as their inheritance to hold,  
That they might serve Him in eternall blis,  
And be partakers of these ioyes of His.   
 
There they in their trinall triplicities  
About Him wait, and on His will depend,           65
Either with nimble wings to cut the skies,   
When He them on His messages doth send,   
Or on His owne dread presence to attend,  
Where they behold the glorie of His light,   
And caroll hymnes of love both day and night.           70
 
Both day and night is unto them all one;  
For He His beames doth unto them extend,  
That darknesse there appeareth never none;   
Ne hath their day, ne hath their blisse, an end.   
But there their termelesse time in pleasure spend:         75
Ne ever should their happinesse decay, 
Had not they dar’d their Lord to disobay. 
 
But pride, impatient of long resting peace,  
Did puffe them up with greedy bold ambition, 
That they gan cast their state how to increase          80
Above the fortune of their first condition,  
And sit in God’s own seat without commission:   
The brightest angel, even the child of Light,   
Drew millions more against their God to fight.  
 
Th’ Almighty, seeing their so bold assay,         85
Kindled the flame of His consuming yre,   
And with His onely breath them blew away  
From heaven’s hight, to which they did aspyre,  
To deepest hell and lake of damned fyre;  
Where they in darknesse and dread horror dwell,         90
Hating the happie light from which they fell.   
 
So that next off-spring of the Maker’s love, 
Next to Himselfe in glorious degree,   
Degendering to hate, fell from above   
Through pride, (for pride and love may ill agree,)         95
And now of sinne to all ensample bee:  
How then can sinnful flesh it selfe assure,  
Sith purest angels fell to be impure?  
 
But that Eternall Fount of love and grace,   
Still flowing forth His goodnesse unto all,          100
Now seeing left a waste and emptie place  
In His wyde pallace, through those angels’ fall,   
Cast to supply the same, and to enstall   
A new unknowen colony therein,   
Whose root from earth’s base groundworke should begin.           105
 
Therefore of clay, base, vile, and next to nought, 
Yet form’d by wondrous skill, and by His might  
According to an heavenly patterne wrought,   
Which He had fashioned in his wise foresight,   
He man did make, and breath’d a living spright          110
Into his face, most beautifull and fayre, 
Endewd with wisedome’s riches, heavenly, rare.  
 
Such He him made, that he resemble might  
Himselfe, as mortall thing immortall could;  
Him to be lord of every living wight           115
He made by love out of his owne like mould,  
In whom He might His mightie selfe behould:  
For Love doth love the thing belov’d to see, 
That like it selfe in lovely shape may bee.  
 
But man, forgetfull of his Maker’s grace          120
No lesse than Angels, whom he did ensew,  
Fell from the hope of promist heavenly place 
Into the mouth of Death, to sinners dew,  
And all his offspring into thraldome threw,  
Where they for ever should in bonds remaine          125
Of never-dead yet ever-dying paine: 
 
Till that great Lord of Love, which him at first   
Made of meere love, and after liked well, 
Seeing him lie like creature long accurst 
In that deep horror of despeyred hell,         130
Him, wretch, in doole would let no longer dwell,   
But cast out of that bondage to redeeme,  
And pay the price, all were his debt extreeme.  
 
Out of the bosome of eternall blisse,  
In which He reigned with His glorious Syre,          135
He downe descended, like a most demisse   
And abiect thrall, in fleshes fraile attyre, 
That He for him might pay sinne’s deadly hyre,  
And him restore unto that happie state 
In which he stood before his haplesse fate.          140
 
In flesh at first the guilt committed was,   
Therefore in flesh it must be satisfyde;  
Nor spirit, nor angel, though they man surpas,  
Could make amends to God for man’s misguyde, 
But onely man himselfe, who selfe did slyde:         145
So, taking flesh of sacred virgin’s wombe,   
For man’s deare sake He did a man become. 
 
And that most blessed bodie, which was borne 
Without all blemish or reprochfull blame, 
He freely gave to be both rent and torne          150
Of cruell hands, who with despightfull shame 
Revyling Him, that them most vile became, 
At length Him nayled on a gallow-tree, 
And slew the lust by most uniust decree.  
 
O huge and most unspeakeable impression           155
Of Love’s deep wound, that pierst the piteous hart 
Of that deare Lord with so entyre affection, 
And, sharply launcing every inner part,   
Dolours of death into His soule did dart, 
Doing him die that never it deserved,          160
To free His foes, that from His heast had swerved! 
 
What hart can feel least touch of so sore launch,  
Or thought can think the depth of so deare wound?  
Whose bleeding sourse their streames yet never staunch,  
But stil do flow, and freshly still redownd,         165
To heale the sores of sinfull soules unsound,   
And clense the guilt of that infected cryme  
Which was enrooted in all fleshly slyme.  
 
O blessed Well of Love! O Floure of Grace!   
O glorious Morning-Starre! O Lampe of Light!         170
Most lively image of thy Father’s face,   
Eternal King of Glorie, Lord of Might, 
Meeke Lambe of God, before all worlds behight,  
How can we Thee requite for all this good?   
Or what can prize that Thy most precious blood?         175
 
Yet nought Thou ask’st in lieu of all this love,   
But love of us, for guerdon of thy paine: 
Ay me! what can us lesse than that behove?   
Had He required life for us againe, 
Had it beene wrong to ask His owne with gaine?          180
He gave us life, He it restored lost;  
Then life were least, that us so little cost.   
 
But He our life hath left unto us free;   
Free that was thrall, and blessed that was band;   
Ne ought demaunds but that we loving bee,         185
As He Himselfe hath lov’d us afore-hand,  
And bound therto with an eternall band,   
Him first to love that was so dearely bought,   
And next our brethren, to his image wrought. 
 
Him first to love great right and reason is,         190
Who first to us our life and being gave,  
And after, when we fared had amisse,   
Us wretches from the second death did save;  
And last, the food of life, which now we have,  
Even He Himselfe, in his dear sacrament,          195
To feede our hungry soules, unto us lent. 
 
Then next, to love our brethren, that were made 
Of that selfe mould, and that self Maker’s hand,   
That we, and to the same againe shall fade,  
Where they shall have like heritage of land,         200
However here on higher steps we stand, 
Which also were with selfe-same price redeemed  
That we, however of us light esteemed. 
 
And were they not, yet since that loving Lord   
Commanded us to love them for His sake,           205
Even for His sake, and for His sacred word,  
Which in His last bequest He to us spake, 
We should them love, and with their needs partake; 
Knowing that, whatsoe’er to them we give, 
We give to Him by whom we all doe live.           210
 
Such mercy He by His most holy reede   
Unto us taught, and to approve it trew,   
Ensampled it by His most righteous deede, 
Shewing us mercie, (miserable crew!)   
That we the like should to the wretches shew,           215
And love our brethren; thereby to approve 
How much Himselfe that loved us we love.  
 
Then rouze thyselfe, O Earth! out of thy soyle, 
In which thou wallowest like to filthy swyne,   
And doest thy mynd in durty pleasures moyle,         220
Unmindfull of that dearest Lord of thyne; 
Lift up to Him thy heavie clouded eyne,   
That thou this soveraine bountie mayst behold,  
And read, through love, His mercies manifold.   
 
Beginne from first, where he encradled was           225
In simple cratch, wrapt in a wad of hay   
Betweene the toylfull oxe and humble asse,   
And in what rags, and in how base aray,   
The glory of our heavenly riches lay,  
When Him the silly shepheards came to see,           230
Whom greatest princes sought on lowest knee. 
 
From thence reade on the storie of His life, 
His humble carriage, His unfaulty wayes,  
His cancred foes, His fights, His toyle, His strife,  
His paines, His povertie, His sharpe assayes,           235
Through which he past His miserable dayes,   
Offending none and doing good to all,  
Yet being malist both by great and small. 
 
And look at last, how of most wretched wights   
He taken was, betrayd, and false accused;         240
How with most scornfull taunts and fell despights  
He was revyld, disgrast, and foule abused;   
How scourgd, how crownd, how buffeted, how brused; 
And lastly, how twixt robbers crucifyde   
With bitter wounds through hands, through feet, and syde.           245
 
Then let thy flinty hart, that feeles no paine, 
Empierced be with pittifull remorse,   
And let thy bowels bleede in every vaine, 
At sight of His most sacred heavenly corse,  
So torne and mangled with malicious forse;           250
And let thy soule, whose sins His sorrows wrought, 
Melt into teares, and grone in grieved thought. 
 
With sence whereof, whilest so thy softened spirit 
Is inly toucht, and humbled with meeke zeale 
Through meditation of His endlesse merit,         255
Lift up thy mind to th’ Author of thy weale, 
And to His soveraine mercie doe appeale:  
Learne Him to love that loved thee so deare, 
And in thy brest His blessed image beare. 
 
With all thy hart, with all thy soule and mind,         260
Thou must Him love, and His beheasts embrace:   
All other loves, with which the world doth blind   
Weake fancies, and stirre up affections base,   
Thou must renounce and utterly displace;  
And give thyselfe unto Him full and free,         265
That full and freely gave Himselfe to thee.  
   TO the assembled folk   
At great St. Kavin’s spoke 
Young Brother Amiel on Christmas Eve;  
I give you joy, my friends,   
That as the round year ends,          5
We meet once more for gladness by God’s leave.  
 
On other festal days 
For penitence or praise 
Or prayer we meet, or fullness of thanksgiving; 
To-night we calendar        10
The rising of that star 
Which lit the old world with new joy of living. 
 
Ah, we disparage still  
The Tidings of Good Will,  
Discrediting Love’s gospel now as then!          15
And with the verbal creed  
That God is love indeed,   
Who dares make Love his god before all men?  
 
Shall we not, therefore, friends,   
Resolve to make amends         20
To that glad inspiration of the heart; 
To grudge not, to cast out 
Selfishness, malice, doubt,   
Anger and fear; and for the better part,  
 
To love so much, so well,         25
The spirit cannot tell  
The range and sweep of her own boundary!  
There is no period   
Between the soul and God;  
Love is the tide, God the eternal sea.…          30
 
To-day we walk by love; 
To strive is not enough,   
Save against greed and ignorance and might.  
We apprehend peace comes   
Not with the roll of drums,          35
But in the still processions of the night.   
 
And we perceive, not awe   
But love is the great law  
That binds the world together safe and whole.   
The splendid planets run          40
Their courses in the sun;  
Love is the gravitation of the soul.   
 
In the profound unknown,   
Illumined, fair, and lone, 
Each star is set to shimmer in its place.        45
In the profound divine  
Each soul is set to shine, 
And its unique appointed orbit trace.  
 
There is no near nor far,  
Where glorious Algebar         50
Swings round his mighty circuit through the night, 
Yet where without a sound  
The winged seed comes to ground, 
And the red leaf seems hardly to alight.  
 
One force, one lore, one need        55
For satellite and seed, 
In the serene benignity for all. 
Letting her time-glass run 
With star-dust, sun by sun,   
In Nature’s thought there is no great nor small.          60
 
There is no far nor near   
Within the spirit’s sphere.   
The summer sunset’s scarlet-yellow wings  
Are tinged with the same dye  
That paints the tulip’s ply.         65
And what is colour but the soul of things?   
 
(The earth was without form;  
God moulded it with storm, 
Ice, flood, and tempest, gleaming tint and hue; 
Lest it should come to ill        70
For lack of spirit still,  
He gave it colour,—let the love shine through.)…   
 
Of old, men said, ‘Sin not;   
By every line and jot   
Ye shall abide; man’s heart is false and vile.’        75
Christ said, ‘By love alone   
In man’s heart is God known;  
Obey the word no falsehood can defile.’…  
 
And since that day we prove   
Only how great is love,        80
Nor to this hour its greatness half believe. 
For to what other power 
Will life give equal dower,   
Or chaos grant one moment of reprieve! 
 
Look down the ages’ line,         85
Where slowly the divine 
Evinces energy, puts forth control; 
See mighty love alone   
Transmuting stock and stone,  
Infusing being, helping sense and soul.          90
 
And what is energy,  
In-working, which bids be  
The starry pageant and the life of earth? 
What is the genesis  
Of every joy and bliss,        95
Each action dared, each beauty brought to birth?   
 
What hangs the sun on high?   
What swells the growing rye?  
What bids the loons cry on the Northern lake?   
What stirs in swamp and swale,         100
When April winds prevail,  
And all the dwellers of the ground awake?…   
   O NECTAR! O delicious stream! 
      O ravishing and only pleasure! Where   
      Shall such another theme   
Inspire my tongue with joys or please mine ear! 
      Abridgement of delights!           5
        And Queen of sights!  
O mine of rarities! O Kingdom wide! 
O more! O cause of all! O glorious Bride! 
  O God! O Bride of God! O King! 
  O soul and crown of everything!          10
 
    Did not I covet to behold 
Some endless monarch, that did always live   
    In palaces of gold, 
Willing all kingdoms, realms, and crowns to give   
    Unto my soul! Whose love         15
      A spring might prove 
Of endless glories, honours, friendships, pleasures,  
Joys, praises, beauties and celestial treasures!   
  Lo, now I see there’s such a King,   
  The fountain-head of everything!         20
 
    Did my ambition ever dream   
Of such a Lord, of such a love! Did I  
    Expect so sweet a stream  
As this at any time! Could any eye  
    Believe it! Why all power        25
      Is used here;  
Joys down from Heaven on my head do shower,  
And Jove beyond the fiction doth appear   
  Once more in golden rain to come  
  To Danae’s pleasing fruitful womb.          30
  
LOVE, lift me up upon thy golden wings,   
From this base world unto thy heavens hight, 
Where I may see those admirable things 
Which there thou workest by thy soveraine might,   
Farre above feeble reach of earthly sight,           5
That I thereof an heavenly hymne may sing 
Unto the God of Love, high heavens king.  
 
Many lewd layes (ah, woe is me the more!) 
In praise of that mad fit which fooles call love,  
I have in th’ heat of youth made heretofore,         10
That in light wits did loose affection move. 
But all those follies now I do reprove,   
And turned have the tenor of my string,   
The heavenly prayses of true love to sing.   
 
And ye that wont with greedy vaine desire         15
To reade my fault, and wondring at my flame, 
To warme your selves at my wide sparckling fire,   
Sith now that heat is quenched, quench my blame,   
And in her ashes shrowd my dying shame:   
For who my passed follies now pursewes,           20
Beginnes his owne, and my old fault renewes. 
 
BEFORE this worlds great frame, in which al things 
Are now containd, found any being place,  
Ere flitting Time could wag his eyas wings   
About that mightie bound, which doth embrace         25
The rolling spheres, and parts their houres by space, 
That high eternall Powre, which now doth move   
In all these things, mov’d in it selfe by love. 
 
It lov’d it selfe, because it selfe was faire;  
(For faire is lov’d;) and of it selfe begot          30
Like to it selfe his eldest Sonne and Heire, 
Eternall, pure, and voide of sinfull blot,   
The firstling of his joy, in whom no jot  
Of loves dislike or pride was to be found,   
Whom he therefore with equall honour crownd.         35
 
With him he raignd, before all time prescribed, 
In endlesse glorie and immortall might,   
Together with that third from them derived,  
Most wise, most holy, most almightie Spright,   
Whose kingdomes throne no thought of earthly wight         40
Can comprehend, much lesse my trembling verse   
With equall words can hope it to reherse. 
 
Yet, O most blessed Spirit, pure lampe of light,   
Eternall spring of grace and wisedome trew,  
Vouchsafe to shed into my barren spright          45
Some little drop of thy celestiall dew,   
That may my rymes with sweet infuse embrew,  
And give me words equall unto my thought, 
To tell the marveiles by thy mercie wrought. 
 
Yet being pregnant still with powrefull grace,          50
And full of fruitfull love, that loves to get   
Things like himselfe, and to enlarge his race,  
His second brood, though not in powre so great, 
Yet full of beautie, next he did beget,   
An infinite increase of angels bright,         55
All glistring glorious in their Makers light.   
 
To them the heavens illimitable hight  
(Not this round heaven, which we from hence behold,   
Adornd with thousand lamps of burning light, 
And with ten thousand gemmes of shyning gold)           60
He gave as their inheritance to hold,  
That they might serve him in eternall blis,  
And be partakers of those joyes of his.   
 
There they in their trinall triplicities  
About him wait, and on his will depend,           65
Either with nimble wings to cut the skies,   
When he them on his messages doth send,   
Or on his owne dread presence to attend,  
Where they behold the glorie of his light,   
And caroll hymnes of love both day and night.           70
 
Both day and night is unto them all one,  
For he his beames doth still to them extend, 
That darknesse there appeareth never none;   
Ne hath their day, ne hath their blisse an end, 
But there their termelesse time in pleasure spend;         75
Ne ever should their happinesse decay, 
Had not they dar’d their Lord to disobay. 
 
But pride, impatient of long resting peace,  
Did puffe them up with greedy bold ambition, 
That they gan cast their state how to increase          80
Above the fortune of their first condition,  
And sit in Gods owne seat without commission:   
The brightest angell, even the Child of Light,  
Drew millions more against their God to fight.  
 
Th’ Almighty, seeing their so bold assay,         85
Kindled the flame of his consuming yre,   
And with his onely breath them blew away  
From heavens hight, to which they did aspyre,   
To deepest hell, and lake of damned fyre; 
Where they in darknesse and dread horror dwell,         90
Hating the happie light from which they fell.   
 
So that next off-spring of the Makers love,  
Next to himselfe in glorious degree,   
Degendering to hate, fell from above   
Through pride; (for pride and love may ill agree)          95
And now of sinne to all ensample bee:  
How then can sinfull flesh it selfe assure,  
Sith purest angels fell to be impure?  
 
But that Eternall Fount of love and grace,   
Still flowing forth his goodnesse unto all,          100
Now seeing left a waste and emptie place  
In his wyde pallace, through those angels fall, 
Cast to supply the same, and to enstall   
A new unknowen colony therein,   
Whose root from earths base ground worke shold begin.         105
 
Therefore of clay, base, vile, and next to nought, 
Yet form’d by wondrous skill, and by his might, 
According to an heavenly patterne wrought,   
Which he had fashiond in his wise foresight, 
He man did make, and breathd a living spright           110
Into his face most beautifull and fayre,  
Endewd with wisedomes riches, heavenly, rare.   
 
Such he him made, that he resemble might  
Himselfe, as mortall thing immortall could;  
Him to be lord of every living wight           115
He made by love out of his owne like mould,  
In whom he might his mightie selfe behould:  
For love doth love the thing belov’d to see, 
That like it selfe in lovely shape may bee.  
 
But man, forgetfull of his Makers grace,          120
No lesse then angels, whom he did ensew,  
Fell from the hope of promist heavenly place,   
Into the mouth of death, to sinners dew,  
And all his off-spring into thraldome threw: 
Where they for ever should in bonds remaine          125
Of never dead, yet ever dying paine.   
 
Till that great Lord of Love, which him at first   
Made of meere love, and after liked well, 
Seeing him lie like creature long accurst 
In that deepe horror of despeyred hell,           130
Him, wretch, in doole would let no lenger dwell,   
But cast out of that bondage to redeeme,  
And pay the price, all were his debt extreeme.  
 
Out of the bosome of eternall blisse,  
In which he reigned with his glorious Syre,          135
He downe descended, like a most demisse   
And abject thrall, in fleshes fraile attyre, 
That he for him might pay sinnes deadly hyre,   
And him restore unto that happie state 
In which he stood before his haplesse fate.          140
 
In flesh at first the guilt committed was,   
Therefore in flesh it must be satisfyde:  
Nor spirit, nor angell, though they man surpas, 
Could make amends to God for mans misguyde,  
But onely man himselfe, who selfe did slyde.         145
So, taking flesh of sacred virgins wombe, 
For mans deare sake he did a man become.  
 
And that most blessed bodie, which was borne 
Without all blemish or reprochfull blame, 
He freely gave to be both rent and torne          150
Of cruell hands, who with despightfull shame 
Revyling him, that them most vile became, 
At length him nayled on a gallow tree, 
And slew the just by most unjust decree.  
 
O huge and most unspeakeable impression           155
Of loves deepe wound, that pierst the piteous hart 
Of that deare Lord with so entyre affection, 
And sharply launching every inner part,   
Dolours of death into his soule did dart; 
Doing him die, that never it deserved,         160
To free his foes, that from his heast had swerved! 
 
What hart can feele least touch of so sore launch, 
Or thought can think the depth of so deare wound,  
Whose bleeding sourse their streames yet never staunch,  
But stil do flow, and freshly still redound,         165
To heale the sores of sinfull soules unsound,   
And clense the guilt of that infected cryme, 
Which was enrooted in all fleshly slyme?  
 
O blessed Well of Love! O Floure of Grace!   
O glorious Morning Starre! O Lampe of Light!         170
Most lively image of thy Fathers face, 
Eternall King of Glorie, Lord of Might,   
Meeke Lambe of God, before all worlds behight,  
How can we thee requite for all this good?   
Or what can prize that thy most precious blood?         175
 
Yet nought thou ask’st in lieu of all this love,   
But love of us, for guerdon of thy paine. 
Ay me! what can us lesse then that behove?   
Had he required life of us againe,  
Had it beene wrong to aske his owne with gaine?         180
He gave us life, he it restored lost;  
Then life were least, that us so litle cost. 
 
But he our life hath left unto us free,   
Free that was thrall, and blessed that was band;   
Ne ought demaunds, but that we loving bee,           185
As he himselfe hath lov’d us afore hand,  
And bound therto with an eternall band,   
Him first to love, that us so dearely bought,   
And next, our brethren, to his image wrought.   
 
Him first to love, great right and reason is,           190
Who first to us our life and being gave;  
And after, when we fared had amisse,   
Us wretches from the second death did save;  
And last, the food of life, which now we have,  
Even himselfe in his deare sacrament,          195
To feede our hungry soules, unto us lent. 
 
Then next, to love our brethren, that were made 
Of that selfe mould and that selfe Makers hand  
That we, and to the same againe shall fade,  
Where they shall have like heritage of land,         200
How ever here on higher steps we stand;   
Which also were with selfe same price redeemed  
That we, how ever of us light esteemed.   
 
And were they not, yet since that loving Lord   
Commaunded us to love them for his sake,          205
Even for his sake, and for his sacred word,  
Which in his last bequest he to us spake, 
We should them love, and with their needs partake; 
Knowing that whatsoere to them we give,   
We give to him, by whom we all doe live.          210
 
Such mercy he by his most holy reede   
Unto us taught, and to approve it trew,   
Ensampled it by his most righteous deede, 
Shewing us mercie, miserable crew!  
That we the like should to the wretches shew,           215
And love our brethren; thereby to approve 
How much himselfe, that loved us, we love.   
 
Then rouze thy selfe, O Earth, out of thy soyle,   
In which thou wallowest like to filthy swyne,   
And doest thy mynd in durty pleasures moyle,         220
Unmindfull of that dearest Lord of thyne; 
Lift up to him thy heavie clouded eyne,   
That thou his soveraine bountie mayst behold,   
And read through love his mercies manifold.  
 
Beginne from first, where he encradled was           225
In simple cratch, wrapt in a wad of hay,  
Betweene the toylefull oxe and humble asse,  
And in what rags, and in how base aray,   
The glory of our heavenly riches lay,  
When him the silly shepheards came to see,           230
Whom greatest princes sought on lowest knee. 
 
From thence reade on the storie of his life, 
His humble carriage, his unfaulty wayes,  
His cancred foes, his fights, his toyle, his strife,  
His paines, his povertie, his sharpe assayes         235
Through which he past his miserable dayes,   
Offending none, and doing good to all, 
Yet being malist both of great and small. 
 
And looke at last, how of most wretched wights  
He taken was, betrayd, and false accused;         240
How with most scornefull taunts, and fell despights,  
He was revyld, disgrast, and foule abused,   
How scourgd, how crownd, how buffeted, how brused; 
And lastly, how twixt robbers crucifyde,  
With bitter wounds through hands, through feet, and syde.           245
 
Then let thy flinty hart, that feeles no paine, 
Empierced be with pittifull remorse,   
And let thy bowels bleede in every vaine, 
At sight of his most sacred heavenly corse,  
So torne and mangled with malicious forse,           250
And let thy soule, whose sins his sorrows wrought, 
Melt into teares, and grone in grieved thought. 
 
LOVE is anterior to life,  
  Posterior to death,   
Initial of creation, and   
  The exponent of breath.  


I PLAY'D with you 'mid cowslips blowing,   
  When I was six and you were four;  
When garlands weaving, flower-balls throwing,    
  Were pleasures soon to please no more.   
Through groves and meads, o'er grass and heather,           5
  With little playmates, to and fro,    
We wander'd hand in hand together;   
  But that was sixty years ago.   
 
You grew a lovely roseate maiden,    
  And still our early love was strong;   10
Still with no care our days were laden,    
  They glided joyously along;  
And I did love you very dearly,   
  How dearly words want power to show;  
I thought your heart was touch'd as nearly;    15
  But that was fifty years ago.   
 
Then other lovers came around you,   
  Your beauty grew from year to year,   
And many a splendid circle found you    
  The centre of its glimmering sphere.   20
I saw you then, first vows forsaking,   
  On rank and wealth your hand bestow;  
O, then I thought my heart was breaking!—  
  But that was forty years ago.   
  
(From the Fourth Book; translated by John Dryden)

THUS, therefore, he who feels the fiery dart 
Of strong desire transfix his amorous heart, 
Whether some beauteous boy’s alluring face,  
Or lovelier maid, with unresisting grace, 
From her each part the winged arrow sends,           5
From whence he first was struck he thither tends;  
Restless he roams, impatient to be freed, 
And eager to inject the sprightly seed;   
For fierce desire does all his mind employ,  
And ardent love assures approaching joy.          10
Such is the nature of that pleasing smart,   
Whose burning drops distil upon the heart,   
The fever of the soul shot from the fair, 
And the cold ague of succeeding care.  
If absent, her idea still appears,          15
And her sweet name is chiming in your ears.  
But strive those pleasing phantoms to remove,   
And shun the aerial images of love, 
That feed the flame; when one molests thy mind, 
Discharge thy loins on all the leaky kind;           20
For that’s a wiser way than to restrain   
Within thy swelling nerves that hoard of pain.  
For every hour some deadlier symptom shows,  
And by delay the gathering venom grows,   
When kindly applications are not used;         25
The viper, love, must on the wound be bruised:  
On that one object ’tis not safe to stay, 
But force the tide of thought some other way:   
The squandered spirits prodigally throw,  
And in the common globe of nature sow.         30
Nor wants he all the bliss that lovers feign,   
Who takes the pleasure, and avoids the pain; 
For purer joys in purer health abound, 
And less affect the sickly than the sound.   
  When love its utmost vigor does employ,         35
Even then ’tis but a restless wandering joy: 
Nor knows the lover in that wild excess,  
With hands or eyes, what first he would possess:   
But strains at all, and, fast’ning where he strains,  
Too closely presses with his frantic pains;          40
With biting kisses hurts the twining fair,   
Which shows his joys imperfect, insincere:   
For, stung with inward rage, he flings around,  
And strives to avenge the smart on that which gave the wound.  
But love those eager bitings does restrain,          45
And mingling pleasure mollifies the pain. 
For ardent hope still flatters anxious grief,   
And sends him to his foe to seek relief:  
Which yet the nature of the thing denies; 
For love, and love alone of all our joys,         50
By full possession does but fan the fire; 
The more we still enjoy, the more we still desire. 
Nature for meat and drink provides a space,  
And, when received, they fill their certain place: 
Hence thirst and hunger may be satisfied;         55
But this repletion is to love denied:  
Form, feature, colour, whatsoe’er delight 
Provokes the lover’s endless appetite, 
These fill no space, nor can we thence remove   
With lips, or hands, or all our instruments of love:          60
In our deluded grasp we nothing find,  
But thin aerial shapes, that fleet before the mind.   
As he, who in a dream with drought is curst, 
And finds no real drink to quench his thirst;   
Runs to imagined lakes his heat to steep,         65
And vainly swills and labors in his sleep;   
So love with phantoms cheats our longing eyes,  
Which hourly seeing never satisfies:   
Our hands pull nothing from the parts they strain, 
But wander o’er the lovely limbs in vain:         70
Nor when the youthful pair more closely join,   
When hands in hands they lock, and thighs in thighs they twine,   
Just in the raging foam of full desire,   
When both press on, both murmur, both expire,   
They grip, they squeeze, their humid tongues they dart,          75
As each would force their way to t’other’s heart:  
In vain; they only cruise about the coast;   
For bodies cannot pierce, nor be in bodies lost;   
As sure they strive to be, when both engage  
In that tumultuous momentary rage;          80
So ’tangled in the nets of love they lie, 
Till man dissolves in that excess of joy. 
Then, when the gathered bag has burst its way,  
And ebbing tides the slackened nerves betray,   
A pause ensues; and nature nods awhile,           85
Till with recruited rage new spirits boil;   
And then the same vain violence returns;  
With flames renewed the erected furnace burns.  
Again they in each other would be lost,   
But still by adamantine bars are crossed.         90
All ways they try, successless all they prove,  
To cure the secret sore of ling’ring love.   
  Besides—— 
They waste their strength in the venereal strife,  
And to a woman’s will enslave their life;         95
The estate runs out, and mortgages are made; 
All offices of friendship are decayed; 
Their fortune ruined, and their fame betrayed.  
Assyrian ointment from their temples flows,  
And diamond buckles sparkle at their shoes.          100
The cheerful emerald twinkles on their hands,   
With all the luxury of foreign lands:  
And the blue coat, that with embroid’ry shines, 
Is drunk with sweat of their o’er-labored loins.   
Their frugal fathers’ gains they misemploy,          105
And turn to paint, and pearl, and ev’ry female toy.   
French fashions, costly treats are their delight;  
The park by day, and plays and balls by night.  
In vain:——  
For in the fountain, where their sweets are sought,           110
Some bitter bubbles up, and poisons all the draught.  
First, guilty Conscience does the mirror bring, 
Then sharp Remorse shoots out her angry sting;  
And anxious thoughts, within themselves at strife, 
Upbraid the long misspent, luxurious life.           115
Perhaps, the fickle fair one proves unkind,  
Or drops a doubtful word, that pains his mind,  
And leaves a rankling jealousy behind. 
Perhaps, he watches close her amorous eyes,  
And in the act of ogling does surprise;           120
And thinks he sees upon her cheeks the while 
The dimpled tracks of some foregoing smile;  
His raging pulse beats thick, and his pent spirits boil. 
This is the product e’en of prosp’rous love: 
Think then what pangs disastrous passions prove!           125
Innumerable ills; disdain, despair, 
With all the meager family of care. 
  Thus, as I said, ’tis better to prevent,   
Than flatter the disease, and late repent:   
Because to shun the allurement is not hard           130
To minds resolved, forewarned, and well prepared;  
But wondrous difficult, when once beset,  
To struggle through the straits, and break the involving net.  
Yet, thus ensnared, thy freedom thou may’st gain,  
If, like a fool, thou dost not hug thy chain;           135
If not to ruin obstinately blind,   
And wilfully endeavoring not to find   
Her plain defects of body and of mind. 
For thus the Bedlam train of lovers use   
T’ enhance the value, and the faults excuse;         140
And therefore ’tis no wonder if we see 
They doat on dowdies and deformity; 
E’en what they cannot praise, they will not blame, 
But veil with some extenuating name:   
The sallow skin is for the swarthy put,           145
And love can make a slattern of a slut.   
If cat-eyed, then a Pallas is their love; 
If freckled, she’s a party-coloured dove; 
If little, then she’s life and soul all o’er:   
An Amazon, the large two-handed whore.         150
She stammers; oh what grace in lisping lies! 
If she says nothing, to be sure she’s wise.  
If shrill, and with a voice to drown a choir,   
Sharp-witted she must be, and full of fire.  
The lean, consumptive wench, with coughs decayed,          155
Is called a pretty, tight, and slender maid. 
The o’ergrown, a goodly Ceres is exprest, 
A bed-fellow for Bacchus at the least. 
Flat-nose the name of Satyr never misses, 
And hanging blobber lips but pout for kisses.           160
The task were endless all the rest to trace: 
Yet grant she were a Venus for her face   
And shape, yet others equal beauty share; 
And time was you could live without the fair;   
She does no more, in that for which you woo,         165
Then homelier women full as well can do.  
Besides, she daubs; and stinks so much of paint,   
Her own attendants cannot bear the scent, 
But laugh behind, and bite their lips to hold;  
Meantime, excluded, and exposed to cold,          170
The whining lover stands before the gates,   
And there with humble adoration waits: 
Crowning with flowers the threshold and the floor, 
And printing kisses on the obdurate door: 
Who, if admitted in that nick of time,         175
If some unsav’ry whiff betray the crime,  
Invents a quarrel straight, if there be none,   
Or makes some faint excuses to be gone;   
And calls himself a doting fool to serve, 
Ascribing more than woman can deserve.         180
Which well they understand like cunning queens; 
And hide their nastiness behind the scenes,  
From him they have allured, and would retain;   
But to a piercing eye ’tis all in vain:   
For common sense brings all their cheats to view,          185
And the false light discovers by the true;   
Which a wise harlot owns, and hopes to find  
A pardon for defects, that run thro’ all the kind. 
  Nor always do they feign the sweets of love,  
When round the panting youth their pliant limbs they move,          190
And cling, and heave, and moisten ev’ry kiss;   
They often share, and more than share the bliss:   
From every part ev’n to their inmost soul,   
They feel the trickling joys, and run with vigor to the goal.  
Stirred with the same impetuous desire,           195
Birds, beasts, and herds, and mares, their males require:   
Because the throbbing nature in their veins  
Provokes them to assuage their kindly pains. 
The lusty leap the expecting female stands,  
By mutual heat compelled to mutual bands.         200
Thus dogs with lolling tongues by love are tied;   
Nor shouting boys nor blows their union can divide:   
At either end they strive the link to loose; 
In vain, for stronger Venus holds the noose. 
Which never would those wretched lovers do,          205
But that the common heats of love they know; 
The pleasure therefore must be shared in common too:  
And when the woman’s more prevailing juice   
Sucks in the man’s, the mixture will produce 
The mother’s likeness; when the man prevails,           210
His own resemblance in the seed he seals, 
But when we see the new-begotten race  
Reflect the features of each parents’ face,  
Then of the father’s and the mother’s blood  
The justly tempered seed is understood:           215
When both conspire, with equal ardor bent,   
From every limb the due proportion sent,  
When neither party foils, when neither foiled,  
This gives the blended features of the child.   
Sometimes the boy the grandsire’s image bears;          220
Sometimes the more remote progenitor he shares; 
Because the genial atoms of the seed   
Lie long concealed ere they exert the breed; 
And, after sundry ages past, produce   
The tardy likeness of the latent juice.           225
Hence, families such different figures take, 
And represent their ancestors in face, and hair, and make;  
Because of the same seed, the voice, and hair,  
And shape, and face, and other members are,  
And the same antique mold the likeness does prepare.          230
Thus oft the father’s likeness does prevail  
In females, and the mother’s in the male; 
For, since the seed is of a double kind,  
From that where we the most resemblance find,   
We may conclude the strongest tincture sent,         235
And that was in conception prevalent.  
  Nor can the vain decrees of powers above   
Deny production to the act of love, 
Or hinder fathers of that happy name,  
Or with a barren womb the matron shame;           240
As many think, who stain with victims’ blood 
The mournful altars, and with incense load,  
To bless the show’ry seed with future life,  
And to impregnate the well-laboured wife. 
In vain they weary Heaven with prayer, or fly           245
To oracles, or magic numbers try:   
For barrenness of sexes will proceed   
Either from too condensed or wat’ry seed: 
The wat’ry juice too soon dissolves away, 
And in the parts projected will not stay:         250
The too condensed, unsouled, unwieldy mass,  
Drops short, nor carries to the destined place; 
Nor pierces to the parts, nor, tho’ injected home, 
Will mingle with the kindly moisture of the womb.  
For nuptials are alike in their success:          255
Some men with fruitful seed some women bless;   
And from some men some women fruitful are;   
Just as their constitutions join or jar:  
And many seeming barren wives have been,  
Who after, matched with more prolific men,           260
Have filled a family with prattling boys: 
And many, not supplied at home with joys, 
Have found a friend abroad, to ease their smart,   
And to perform the sapless husbands’ part.   
So much it does import that seed with seed           265
Should of the kindly mixture make the breed; 
And thick with thin, and thin with thick should join, 
So to produce and propagate the line.  
Of such concernment too is drink and food,   
To incrassate, to attenuate the blood.         270
Of like importance is the posture too, 
In which the genial feat of love we do:   
For, as the females of the four-foot kind 
Receive the leapings of their males behind;  
So the good wives, with loins uplifted high,         275
And leaning on their hands, the fruitful stroke may try: 
For in that posture will they best conceive: 
Not when, supinely laid, they frisk and heave:  
For active motions only break the blow:   
And more of strumpets than of wives they show;          280
When, answering stroke with stroke, the mingled liquors flow;  
Endearments eager, and too brisk a bound  
Throws off the plowshare from the furrowed ground. 
But common harlots in conjunction heave   
Because ’tis less their business to conceive         285
Than to delight, and to provoke the deed; 
A trick which honest wives but little need.  
Now is it from the gods, or Cupid’s dart, 
That many a homely woman takes the heart, 
But wives well-humored, dutiful, and chaste,         290
And clean, will hold their wand’ring husbands fast;   
Such are the links of love, and such a love will last.   
For what remains, long habitude, and use, 
Will kindness in domestic bands produce:  
For custom will a strong impression leave.           295
Hard bodies, which the lightest stroke receive, 
In length of time will molder and decay,  
And stones with drops of rain are washed away.
And I lived on, to wed another:    25
  No cause she gave me to repine;    
And when I heard you were a mother,  
  I did not wish the children mine.  
My own young flock, in fair progression,   
  Made up a pleasant Christmas row:   30
My joy in them was past expression;  
  But that was thirty years ago.  
 









  HAVING, in the greener times of my youth, composed these former two hymnes in the praise of love and beautie, and finding that the same too much pleased those of like age and disposition, which, being too vehemently caried with that kind of affection, do rather sucke out poyson to their strong passion, then hony to their honest delight, I was moved by the one of you two most excellent Ladies, to call in the same. But being unable so to doe, by reason that many copies thereof were formerly scattered abroad, I resolved at least to amend, and by way of retractation to reforme them, making in stead of those two hymnes of earthly or naturall love and beautie, two others of heavenly and celestiall. The which I doe dedicate joyntly unto you two honorable sisters, as to the most excellent and rare ornaments of all true love and beautie, both in the one and the other kinde, humbly beseeching you to vouchsafe the patronage of them, and to accept this my humble service, in lieu of the great graces and honourable favours which ye dayly shew unto me, untill such time as I may by better meanes yeeld you some more notable testimonie of my thankfull mind and dutifull devotion.
  And even so I pray for your happinesse.
  Greenwich, this first of September, 1596.
Your Honors most bounden ever
            in all humble service,
Ed. Sp.    


  [The noblewomen to whom this volume is dedicated were sisters, of the great Russell family. The Lady Margaret was that Countess of Cumberland to whom Daniel, a few years later, addressed the most noble of his poems. The Countess of Warwick (whose name was Anne, not Mary) was the widow of Leicester’s brother, ‘the good earl,’ and, as such, had found mention in ‘The Ruins of Time.’
  The words of the dedication have been variously interpreted. The first pair of hymns, composed, we read, ‘in the greener times of my youth,’ (by which we are to understand, probably, the period of the Calendar and of ‘Mother Hubberd’s Tale’) having ‘too much pleased those of like age and disposition,’ were apparently, in 1596, still popular: but one of the noble sisters, disapproving of them, would have them ‘called in;’ whereupon, ‘being unable so to doe,’ the poet ‘resolved at least to amend and by way of retractation to reforme them, making, in stead of those two hymns of earthly or naturall love and beautie, two others of heavenly and celestiall.’ The difficulty is in the final clauses. Did the poet, besides composing the two later hymns, also reduce the earlier to inoffensiveness? or did he let these stand as originally written, and atone for them merely by composing their substitutes? At first, it would seem as if the second interpretation, though more in accord with the words of the letter, were impossible. For in the earlier hymns, as they are printed, there could surely be nothing to shock the most extravagant of prudes: besides, if the lady objected to them in their early form, why should the poet publish them in that form? Yet if, on the other hand, these hymns, as they are printed, be the result of expurgation, one does not see what the poet can have expurgated. Both are organically Platonic: there would seem to be no place in them, at any point, for matter even faintly licentious. Perhaps, however, it has been assumed too readily that the fault of these early hymns was of that kind. Dr. Grosart thinks that the sister who protested was the Countess of Warwick, for she is known to have inclined to Puritanism. If it was she, her protest may very well have been, not against immodesty, but against the very subject matter of these hymns, ‘earthly or naturall love and beautie.’ She may have reprobated them for sinful vanities, just as her nephew, Sidney, being on his death-bed, reprobated his own Arcadia and gave earnest orders for its destruction. In atonement for such a fault, Spenser might well issue the early hymns as they had been written, and let their vanity be foil to the earnestness of the later, composed to replace them. His repentance would then be that of the December eclogue:—
         ‘I, that whilome wont to frame my pype
Unto the shifting of the shepheards foote,
Sike follies nowe have gathered as too ripe,
And cast hem out as rotten and unsoote.
The loser lasse [Rosalind] I cast to please nomore:
One if I please [i. e. God], enough is me therefore.’
The later repentance certainly need not be taken as at all more serious than the earlier, need not be read as an example of ‘the sensitive purity of the poet’s nature.’ In composing his first two hymns he had aimed to embody in verse some of those Neo-Platonic doctrines which were then so popular in Italy, best known to Englishmen, perhaps, in the fourth book of Castiglione’s Courtier. His success had been the more brilliant in that he was first in England to occupy the field. Later, when the Countess of Warwick would have persuaded him that such vanities were unworthy of a ‘sage and serious’ poet, one can understand how he might acquiesce, and, without very real contrition for these youthful hymns, gratify her by others more in consonance with her convictions. For the Neo-Platonic modes of thought were as applicable to Christian doctrine as to theories of ‘earthly or naturall love and beautie,’ and a poet might be sincere in both uses, since neither would be understood literally and since both embodied the spirit of his most serious thought.]


AN HYMNE IN HONOUR OF LOVE

LOVE, that long since hast to thy mighty powre  
Perforce subdude my poore captived hart,  
And raging now therein with restlesse stowre,   
Doest tyrannize in everie weaker part, 
Faine would I seeke to ease my bitter smart          5
By any service I might do to thee,  
Or ought that else might to thee pleasing bee.  
 
And now t’ asswage the force of this new flame, 
And make thee more propitious in my need, 
I meane to sing the praises of thy name,          10
And thy victorious conquests to areed; 
By which thou madest many harts to bleed  
Of mighty victors, with wyde wounds embrewed,   
And by thy cruell darts to thee subdewed. 
 
Onely I feare my wits, enfeebled late          15
Through the sharpe sorrowes which thou hast me bred,  
Should faint, and words should faile me to relate  
The wondrous triumphs of thy great godhed.   
But, if thou wouldst vouchsafe to overspred  
Me with the shadow of thy gentle wing,         20
I should enabled be thy actes to sing. 
 
Come then, O come, thou mightie God of Love, 
Out of thy silver bowres and secret blisse,  
Where thou doest sit in Venus lap above,  
Bathing thy wings in her ambrosiall kisse,           25
That sweeter farre then any nectar is; 
Come softly, and my feeble breast inspire 
With gentle furie, kindled of thy fire.   
 
And ye, sweet Muses, which have often proved 
The piercing points of his avengefull darts,         30
And ye, faire nimphs, which oftentimes have loved  
The cruell worker of your kindly smarts,  
Prepare your selves, and open wide your harts,  
For to receive the triumph of your glorie,   
That made you merie oft, when ye were sorie.         35
 
And ye, faire blossomes of youths wanton breed, 
Which in the conquests of your beautie bost, 
Wherewith your lovers feeble eyes you feed,  
But sterve their harts, that needeth nourture most,   
Prepare your selves to march amongst his host,          40
And all the way this sacred hymne do sing,   
Made in the honor of your soveraigne king.   
 
GREAT God of might, that reignest in the mynd,  
And all the bodie to thy hest doest frame,   
Victor of gods, subduer of mankynd,         45
That doest the lions and fell tigers tame,   
Making their cruell rage thy scornefull game,   
And in their roring taking great delight, 
Who can expresse the glorie of thy might? 
 
Or who alive can perfectly declare          50
The wondrous cradle of thine infancie, 
When thy great mother Venus first thee bare, 
Begot of Plentie and of Penurie, 
Though elder then thine owne nativitie;   
And yet a chyld, renewing still thy yeares,          55
And yet the eldest of the heavenly peares?   
 
For ere this worlds still moving mightie masse  
Out of great Chaos ugly prison crept,  
In which his goodly face long hidden was  
From heavens view, and in deepe darknesse kept,         60
Love, that had now long time securely slept  
In Venus lap, unarmed then and naked,  
Gan reare his head, by Clotho being waked.   
 
And taking to him wings of his owne heate,   
Kindled at first from heavens life-giving fyre,         65
He gan to move out of his idle seate,  
Weakely at first, but after with desyre   
Lifted aloft, he gan to mount up hyre, 
And like fresh eagle, make his hardie flight 
Through all that great wide wast, yet wanting light.          70
 
Yet wanting light to guide his wandring way, 
His owne faire mother, for all creatures sake,  
Did lend him light from her owne goodly ray: 
Then through the world his way he gan to take,  
The world, that was not till he did it make,         75
Whose sundrie parts he from them selves did sever, 
The which before had lyen confused ever.  
 
The earth, the ayre, the water, and the fyre,   
Then gan to raunge them selves in huge array,   
And with contrary forces to conspyre           80
Each against other, by all meanes they may,  
Threatning their owne confusion and decay:   
Ayre hated earth, and water hated fyre,   
Till Love relented their rebellious yre.  
 
He then them tooke, and tempering goodly well           85
Their contrary dislikes with loved meanes,   
Did place them all in order, and compell  
To keepe them selves within their sundrie raines,  
Together linkt with adamantine chaines;   
Yet so as that in every living wight           90
They mixe themselves, and shew their kindly might. 
 
So ever since they firmely have remained, 
And duly well observed his beheast; 
Through which now all these things that are contained 
Within this goodly cope, both most and least,           95
Their being have, and dayly are increast  
Through secret sparks of his infused fyre,   
Which in the barraine cold he doth inspyre.  
 
Thereby they all do live, and moved are   
To multiply the likenesse of their kynd,          100
Whilest they seeke onely, without further care, 
To quench the flame which they in burning fynd: 
But man, that breathes a more immortall mynd,   
Not for lusts sake, but for eternitie, 
Seekes to enlarge his lasting progenie.           105
 
For having yet in his deducted spright 
Some sparks remaining of that heavenly fyre, 
He is enlumind with that goodly light, 
Unto like goodly semblant to aspyre:   
Therefore in choice of love, he doth desyre          110
That seemes on earth most heavenly, to embrace; 
That same is Beautie, borne of heavenly race.   
 
For sure, of all that in this mortall frame  
Contained is, nought more divine doth seeme, 
Or that resembleth more th’ immortall flame          115
Of heavenly light, then Beauties glorious beame.   
What wonder then, if with such rage extreme  
Fraile men, whose eyes seek heavenly things to see,   
At sight thereof so much enravisht bee?   
 
Which well perceiving, that imperious boy         120
Doth therwith tip his sharp empoisned darts; 
Which, glancing through the eyes with countenance coy,   
Rest not till they have pierst the trembling harts,   
And kindled flame in all their inner parts,  
Which suckes the blood, and drinketh up the lyfe           125
Of carefull wretches with consuming griefe.  
 
Thenceforth they playne, and make ful piteous mone 
Unto the author of their balefull bane;   
The daies they waste, the nights they grieve and grone,  
Their lives they loath, and heavens light disdaine;           130
No light but that whose lampe doth yet remaine  
Fresh burning in the image of their eye,  
They deigne to see, and seeing it still dye. 
 
The whylst thou, tyrant Love, doest laugh and scorne  
At their complaints, making their paine thy play;          135
Whylest they lye languishing like thrals forlorne, 
The whyles thou doest triumph in their decay,   
And otherwhyles, their dying to delay, 
Thou doest emmarble the proud hart of her,   
Whose love before their life they doe prefer.           140
 
So hast thou often done (ay me the more!) 
To me thy vassall, whose yet bleeding hart   
With thousand wounds thou mangled hast so sore  
That whole remaines scarse any little part;  
Yet to augment the anguish of my smart,           145
Thou hast enfrosen her disdainefull brest,   
That no one drop of pitie there doth rest.   
 
Why then do I this honor unto thee, 
Thus to ennoble thy victorious name,   
Since thou doest shew no favour unto mee,         150
Ne once move ruth in that rebellious dame,   
Somewhat to slacke the rigour of my flame?   
Certes small glory doest thou winne hereby,  
To let her live thus free, and me to dy.  
 
But if thou be indeede, as men thee call,         155
The worlds great parent, the most kind preserver   
Of living wights, the soveraine lord of all, 
How falles it then that with thy furious fervour   
Thou doest afflict as well the not deserver, 
As him that doeth thy lovely heasts despize,         160
And on thy subjects most doest tyrannize? 
 
Yet herein eke thy glory seemeth more, 
By so hard handling those which best thee serve,   
That ere thou doest them unto grace restore, 
Thou mayest well trie if they will ever swerve,         165
And mayest them make it better to deserve,   
And having got it, may it more esteeme;   
For things hard gotten men more dearely deeme.  
 
So hard those heavenly beauties be enfyred,  
As things divine least passions doe impresse,           170
The more of stedfast mynds to be admyred, 
The more they stayed be on stedfastnesse: 
But baseborne mynds such lamps regard the lesse,   
Which at first blowing take not hastie fyre; 
Such fancies feele no love, but loose desyre.           175
 
For Love is lord of truth and loialtie,   
Lifting himselfe out of the lowly dust 
On golden plumes up to the purest skie,   
Above the reach of loathly sinfull lust,  
Whose base affect, through cowardly distrust         180
Of his weake wings, dare not to heaven fly,  
But like a moldwarpe in the earth doth ly.   
 
His dunghill thoughts, which do themselves enure   
To dirtie drosse, no higher dare aspyre,  
Ne can his feeble earthly eyes endure          185
The flaming light of that celestiall fyre,   
Which kindleth love in generous desyre,   
And makes him mount above the native might   
Of heavie earth, up to the heavens hight. 
 
Such is the powre of that sweet passion,          190
That it all sordid basenesse doth expell, 
And the refyned mynd doth newly fashion   
Unto a fairer forme, which now doth dwell 
In his high thought, that would it selfe excell;   
Which he beholding still with constant sight,           195
Admires the mirrour of so heavenly light. 
 
Whose image printing in his deepest wit,  
He thereon feeds his hungrie fantasy,  
Still full, yet never satisfyde with it;  
Like Tantale, that in store doth sterved ly,         200
So doth he pine in most satiety; 
For nought may quench his infinite desyre,   
Once kindled through that first conceived fyre. 
 
Thereon his mynd affixed wholly is, 
Ne thinks on ought, but how it to attaine;           205
His care, his joy, his hope is all on this,  
That seemes in it all blisses to containe,   
In sight whereof all other blisse seemes vaine. 
Thrise happie man, might he the same possesse,  
He faines himselfe, and doth his fortune blesse.           210
 
And though he do not win his wish to end, 
Yet thus farre happie he him selfe doth weene,  
That heavens such happie grace did to him lend, 
As thing on earth so heavenly to have seene, 
His harts enshrined saint, his heavens queene,          215
Fairer then fairest, in his fayning eye,  
Whose sole aspect he counts felicitye. 
 
Then forth he casts in his unquiet thought,  
What he may do, her favour to obtaine; 
What brave exploit, what perill hardly wrought,         220
What puissant conquest, what adventurous paine, 
May please her best, and grace unto him gaine:  
He dreads no danger, nor misfortune feares;  
His faith, his fortune, in his breast he beares.   
 
Thou art his god, thou art his mightie guyde,           225
Thou, being blind, letst him not see his feares,   
But cariest him to that which he hath eyde,  
Through seas, through flames, through thousand swords and speares:   
Ne ought so strong that may his force withstand,   
With which thou armest his resistlesse hand.         230
 
Witnesse Leander in the Euxine waves,  
And stout Æneas in the Trojane fyre,   
Achilles preassing through the Phrygian glaives,   
And Orpheus daring to provoke the yre  
Of damned fiends, to get his love retyre:         235
For both through heaven and hell thou makest way,  
To win them worship which to thee obay.   
 
And if by all these perils and these paynes  
He may but purchase lyking in her eye, 
What heavens of joy then to himselfe he faynes!         240
Eftsoones he wypes quite out of memory 
What ever ill before he did aby; 
Had it bene death, yet would he die againe,  
To live thus happie as her grace to gaine.   
 
Yet when he hath found favour to his will,           245
He nathemore can so contented rest, 
But forceth further on, and striveth still   
T’ approch more neare, till in her inmost brest 
He may embosomd bee, and loved best;   
And yet not best, but to be lov’d alone;          250
For love can not endure a paragone. 
 
The feare whereof, O how doth it torment  
His troubled mynd with more then hellish paine! 
And to his fayning fansie represent 
Sights never seene, and thousand shadowes vaine,           255
To breake his sleepe and waste his ydle braine; 
Thou that hast never lov’d canst not beleeve 
Least part of th’ evils which poore lovers greeve. 
 
The gnawing envie, the hart-fretting feare,  
The vaine surmizes, the distrustfull showes,         260
The false reports that flying tales doe beare,  
The doubts, the daungers, the delayes, the woes,   
The fayned friends, the unassured foes,   
With thousands more then any tongue can tell,   
Doe make a lovers life a wretches hell.           265
 
Yet is there one more cursed then they all,  
That cancker worme, that monster Gelosie, 
Which eates the hart, and feedes upon the gall, 
Turning all loves delight to miserie,  
Through feare of loosing his felicitie.           270
Ah, gods! that ever ye that monster placed   
In gentle love, that all his joyes defaced!  
 
By these, O Love, thou doest thy entrance make  
Unto thy heaven, and doest the more endeere  
Thy pleasures unto those which them partake,         275
As after stormes, when clouds begin to cleare,  
The sunne more bright and glorious doth appeare;   
So thou thy folke, through paines of Purgatorie,   
Dost beare unto thy blisse, and heavens glorie. 
 
O TALK not to me of a name great in story;    
The days of our youth are the days of our glory;    
And the myrtle and ivy of sweet two-and-twenty   
Are worth all your laurels, though ever so plenty.  
  
What are garlands and crowns to the brow that is wrinkled?           5
'Tis but as a dead flower with May-dew besprinkled:    
Then away with all such from the head that is hoary—   
What care I for the wreaths that can only give glory?  
  
O Fame! if I e'er took delight in thy praises,   
'Twas less for the sake of thy high-sounding phrases,   10
Than to see the bright eyes of the dear one discover   
She thought that I was not unworthy to love her.    
  
There chiefly I sought thee, there only I found thee;  
Her glance was the best of the rays that surround thee;   
When it sparkled o'er aught that was bright in my story,   15
I knew it was love, and I felt it was glory.  
 
There thou them placest in a paradize          280
Of all delight and joyous happie rest, 
Where they doe feede on nectar heavenly wize,   
With Hercules and Hebe, and the rest   
Of Venus dearlings, through her bountie blest,  
And lie like gods in yvorie beds arayd,           285
With rose and lillies over them displayd. 
  
From “Paradise Lost,” Book VIII.

MINE eyes he closed, but open left the cell  
Of fancy, my internal sight, by which  
Abstract, as in a trance, methought I saw,   
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape 
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;         5
Who, stooping, opened my left side, and took 
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm,   
And life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,   
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:   
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands;         10
Under his forming hands a creature grew,  
Manlike, but different sex, so lovely fair,  
That what seemed fair in all the world seemed now  
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained, 
And in her looks, which from that time infused          15
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,   
And into all things from her air inspired 
The spirit of love and amorous delight.   
She disappeared, and left me dark; I waked   
To find her, or forever to deplore          20
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure: 
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,   
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned 
With what all earth or Heaven could bestow   
To make her amiable. On she came,           25
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen, 
And guided by his voice, nor uninformed   
Of nuptial sanctity and marriage rites:   
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,  
In every gesture dignity and love.          30
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud: 
  “This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfilled 
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,  
Giver of all things fair, but fairest this   
Of all thy gifts, nor enviest. I now see          35
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself   
Before me; Woman is her name, of man   
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego 
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere;   
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul.”         40
  She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,  
Yet innocence and virgin modesty,   
Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,  
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,   
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,          45
The more desirable; or, to say all, 
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought,  
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned; 
I followed her; she what was honor knew,  
And with obsequious majesty approved           50
My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower   
I led her blushing like the morn: all Heaven,   
And happy constellations on that hour  
Shed their selectest influence; the earth 
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill;          55
Joyous the birds; fresh gales and gentle airs   
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings 
Flung rose, flung odors from the spicy shrub,   
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night   
Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening star         60
On his hill-top, to light the bridal lamp.
*        *        *        *        *
                        When I approach   
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems, 
And in herself complete, so well to know  
Her own, that what she wills to do or say 
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best;           65
All higher knowledge in her presence falls   
Degraded, wisdom in discourse with her 
Loses discountenanced, and like folly shows; 
Authority and reason on her wait,   
As one intended first, not after made          70
Occasionally; and, to consummate all,  
Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat   
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe 
About her, as a guard angelic placed,
*        *        *        *        *
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught
*        *        *        *        *
        75
So much delights me, as those graceful acts, 
Those thousand decencies that daily flow  
From all her words and actions, mixed with love 
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned   
Union of mind, or in us both one soul;         80
Harmony to behold in wedded pair 
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear. 

 
I KNOW my Love by his way of walking,  
And I know my love by his way of talking, 
And I know my love dressed in a suit of blue,   
And if my Love leaves me, what will I do? 
  And still she cried, “I love him the best,         5
  And a troubled mind, sure, can know no rest,” 
  And still she cried, “Bonny boys are few,  
  And if my Love leaves me, what will I do?” 
 
There is a dance house in Mar’dyke, 
And there my true love goes every night;          10
He takes a strange one upon his knee,  
And don’t you think, now, that vexes me?  
  And still she cried, “I love him the best, 
  And a troubled mind, sure, can know no rest,” 
  And still she cried, “Bonny boys are few,          15
  And if my Love leaves me, what will I do?” 
  
OH! the days are gone, when Beauty bright 
        My heart’s chain wove;   
When my dream of life, from morn till night, 
        Was love, still love. 
        New hope may bloom,           5
        And days may come  
    Of milder, calmer beam,   
But there’s nothing half so sweet in life 
    As love’s young dream: 
No, there’s nothing half so sweet in life         10
    As love’s young dream. 
  
I
LOVE is enough: though the World be a-waning,   
And the woods have no voice but the voice of complaining,   
  Though the sky be too dark for dim eyes to discover 
The gold-cups and daisies fair blooming thereunder,   
Though the hills be held shadows, and the sea a dark wonder,           5
  And this day draw a veil over all deeds pass’d over,   
Yet their hands shall not tremble, their feet shall not falter;   
The void shall not weary, the fear shall not alter 
  These lips and these eyes of the loved and the lover.  
 
II
LOVE is enough: ho ye who seek saving,         10
  Go no further; come hither! there have been who have found it,  
And these know the House of Fulfilment of Craving; 
  These know the Cup with the roses around it;  
  These know the World’s wound and the balm that hath bound it:   
Cry out, the World heedeth not, ‘Love, lead us home!’         15
 
He leadeth, He hearkeneth, He cometh to you-ward;  
  Set your faces as steel to the fears that assemble  
Round his goad for the faint, and his scourge for the froward: 
  Lo his lips, how with tales of last kisses they tremble!  
  Lo his eyes of all sorrow that may not dissemble!           20
Cry out, for he heedeth, ‘O Love, lead us home!’   
  
NOW 1 what is Love, I pray thee, tell? 
It is that fountain and that well   
Where pleasure and repentance dwell;   
It is perhaps the sauncing bell 2   
That tolls all into heaven or hell:         5
And this is Love, as I hear tell.   
 
Yet what is Love, I prithee, say?   
It is a work on holiday,   
It is December matched with May, 
When lusty bloods in fresh array         10
Hear ten months after of the play:  
And this is Love, as I hear say. 
 
She

ONLY to be twin elements of joy  
In this extravagance of Being, Love,   
Were our divided natures shaped in twain; 
And to this hour the whole world must consent.  
Is it not very marvellous, our lives           5
Can only come to this out of a long 
Strange sundering, with the years of the world between us?  
 
He

  Shall life do more than God? for hath not God 
Striven with himself, when into known delight   
His unaccomplisht joy he would put forth,—          10
This mystery of a world sign of his striving?   
Else wherefore this, a thing to break the mind  
With labouring in the wonder of it, that here   
Being—the world and we—is suffered to be!—   
But, lying on thy breast one notable day,        15
Sudden exceeding agony of love   
Made my mind a trance of infinite knowledge. 
I was not: yet I saw the will of God   
As light unfashion’d, unendurable flame,  
Interminable, not to be supposed;          20
And there was no more creature except light,—   
The dreadful burning of the lonely God’s  
Unutter’d joy. And then, past telling, came  
Shuddering and division in the light:  
Therein, like trembling, was desire to know         25
Its own perfect beauty; and it became  
A cloven fire, a double flaming, each  
Adorable to each; against itself 
Waging a burning love, which was the world;— 
A moment satisfied in that love-strife        30
I knew the world!—And when I fell from there,   
Then knew I also what this life would do  
In being twin,—in being man and woman! 
For it would do even as its endless Master,  
Making the world, had done; yea, with itself        35
Would strive, and for the strife would into sex 
Be cloven, double burning, made thereby   
Desirable to itself. Contrivèd joy  
Is sex in life; and by no other thing  
Than by a perfect sundering, could life          40
Change the dark stream of unappointed joy 
To perfect praise of itself, the glee that loves   
And worships its own Being. This is ours! 
Yet only for that we have been so long 
Sundered desire: thence is our life all praise.—          45
But we, well knowing by our strength of joy  
There is no sundering more, how far we love  
From those sad lives that know a half-love only,   
Alone thereby knowing themselves for ever 
Sealed in division of love, and therefore made         50
To pour their strength always into their love’s 
Fierceness, as green wood bleeds its hissing sap   
Into red heat of a fire! Not so do we: 
The cloven anger, life, hath left to wage 
Its flame against itself, here turned to one        55
Self-adoration.—Ah, what comes of this?   
The joy falters a moment, with closed wings  
Wearying in its upward journey, ere 
Again it goes on high, bearing its song,  
Its delight breathing and its vigour beating        60
The highest height of the air above the world.  
 
She

  What hast thou done to me!—I would have soul, 
Before I knew thee, Love, a captive held  
By flesh. Now, inly delighted with desire,   
My body knows itself to be nought else        65
But thy heart’s worship of me; and my soul   
Therein is sunlight held by warm gold air.   
Nay, all my body is become a song   
Upon the breath of spirit, a love-song.   
 
He

  And mine is all like one rapt faculty,         70
As it were listening to the love in thee, 
My whole mortality trembling to take   
Thy body like heard singing of thy spirit.   
 
She

  Surely by this, Beloved, we must know   
Our love is perfect here,—that not as holds         75
The common dullard thought, we are things lost  
In an amazement that is all unware; 
But wonderfully knowing what we are!   
Lo, now that body is the song whereof  
Spirit is mood, knoweth not our delight?         80
Knoweth not beautifully now our love,  
That Life, here to this festival bid come 
Clad in his splendour of worldly day and night, 
Filled and empower’d by heavenly lust, is all   
The glad imagination of the Spirit?        85
 
He

  Were it not so, Love could not be at all:  
Nought could be, but a yearning to fulfil 
Desire of beauty, by vain reaching forth  
Of sense to hold and understand the vision   
Made by impassion’d body,—vision of thee!        90
But music mixt with music are, in love,   
Bodily senses; and as flame hath light,   
Spirit this nature hath imagined round it,   
No way concealed therein, when love comes near, 
Nor in the perfect wedding of desires         95
Suffering any hindrance.   
 
She

  Ah, but now, 
Now am I given love’s eternal secret!  
Yea, thou and I who speak, are but the joy   
Of our for ever mated spirits; but now       100
The wisdom of my gladness even through Spirit   
Looks, divinely elate. Who hath for joy   
Our Spirits? Who hath imagined them 
Round him in fashion’d radiance of desire,   
As into light of these exulting bodies       105
Flaming Spirit is uttered? 
 
He
ALL thoughts, all passions, all delights,  
Whatever stirs this mortal frame,    
All are but ministers of Love,    
    And feed his sacred flame.    
 
Oft in my waking dreams do I           5
Live o'er again that happy hour,  
When midway on the mount I lay,   
    Beside the ruin'd tower.   
 
The moonshine, stealing o'er the scene,    
Had blended with the lights of eve;   10
And she was there, my hope, my joy,  
    My own dear Genevieve!  
 
She lean'd against the armèd man,    
The statue of the armèd Knight;   
She stood and listen'd to my lay,     15
    Amid the lingering light.  
 
Few sorrows hath she of her own,  
My hope! my joy! my Genevieve!    
She loves me best whene'er I sing    
    The songs that make her grieve.   20
 
I play'd a soft and doleful air;  
I sang an old and moving story—   
An old rude song, that suited well   
    That ruin wild and hoary.  
 
She listen'd with a flitting blush,   25
With downcast eyes and modest grace;    
For well she knew I could not choose    
    But gaze upon her face.    
 
I told her of the Knight that wore   
Upon his shield a burning brand;   30
And that for ten long years he woo'd    
    The Lady of the Land.   
 
I told her how he pined: and ah!  
The deep, the low, the pleading tone    
With which I sang another's love,     35
    Interpreted my own.  
 
She listen'd with a flitting blush,  
With downcast eyes, and modest grace;   
And she forgave me, that I gazed  
    Too fondly on her face!     40
 
But when I told the cruel scorn   
That crazed that bold and lovely Knight,   
And that he cross'd the mountain-woods,    
    Nor rested day nor night;  
 
That sometimes from the savage den,   45
And sometimes from the darksome shade,  
And sometimes starting up at once    
    In green and sunny glade—  
 
There came and look'd him in the face   
An angel beautiful and bright;     50
And that he knew it was a Fiend,  
    This miserable Knight!  
 
And that, unknowing what he did,  
He leap'd amid a murderous band,  
And saved from outrage worse than death     55
    The Lady of the Land;—  
 
And how she wept and clasp'd his knees;    
And how she tended him in vain—   
And ever strove to expiate  
    The scorn that crazed his brain;—    60
 
And that she nursed him in a cave;   
And how his madness went away,    
When on the yellow forest leaves  
    A dying man he lay;—    
 
His dying words—but when I reach'd    65
That tenderest strain of all the ditty,    
My faltering voice and pausing harp  
    Disturb'd her soul with pity!    
 
All impulses of soul and sense    
Had thrill'd my guileless Genevieve;     70
The music and the doleful tale,   
    The rich and balmy eve;    
 Melibœus.
SHEPHERD, what’s love, I pray thee tell?  
Fau.  It is that fountain and that well   
Where pleasure and repentance dwell;   
It is perhaps that sauncing bell 
  That tolls all into heaven or hell;          5
  And this is love as I heard tell. 
 
Meli.  Yet what is love, I prithee say?   
Fau.  It is a work on holiday;   
It is December matched with May, 
When lusty bloods, in fresh array,          10
  Hear ten months after of the play;   
  And this is love as I hear say.   
  
LET it go on; let the love of this hour be poured out till all the answers are made, the last dollar spent and the last blood gone. 
  
Time runs with an ax and a hammer, time slides down the hallways with a pass-key and a master-key, and time gets by, time wins.  
  
Let the love of this hour go on; let all the oaths and children and people of this love be clean as a washed stone under a waterfall in the sun.   
  
Time is a young man with ballplayer legs, time runs a winning race against life and the clocks, time tickles with rust and spots.   
  
Let love go on; the heartbeats are measured out with a measuring glass, so many apiece to gamble with, to use and spend and reckon; let love go on.           5


 
FROM the Desert I come to thee,  
  On a stallion shod with fire;  
And the winds are left behind 
  In the speed of my desire.  
Under thy window I stand,          5
  And the midnight hears my cry: 
I love thee, I love but thee! 
  With a love that shall not die 
    Till the sun grows cold,  
    And the stars are old,         10
    And the leaves of the Judgment  
        Book unfold! 
  
WHOEVER loves, if he do not propose 
The right true end of love, he’s one that goes  
To sea for nothing but to make him sick.  
Love is a bear-whelp born; if we o’er-lick   
Our love, and force it new strange shapes 1 to take,          5
We err, and of a lump a monster make.  
Were not a calf a monster, that were grown   
Faced like a man, though better than his own?   
Perfection is in unity; prefer   
One woman first, and then one thing in her.          10
I, when I value gold, may think upon   
The ductileness, the application,   
The wholesomeness, the ingenuity,   
From rust, from soil, from fire ever free;   
But if I love it, ’tis because ’tis made          15
By our new nature, use, the soul of trade.   
  All this in women we might think upon,  
—If women had them—and yet love but one.  
Can men more injure women than to say  
They love them for that, by which they’re not they?           20
Makes virtue woman? must I cool my blood  
Till I both be, and find one wise and good?  
May barren angels love so. But if we   
Make love to woman, virtue is not she, 
As beauty is not, nor wealth. 2 He that strays thus           25
From her to hers is more adulterous 
Than if he took her maid. Search every sphere   
And firmament, our Cupid is not there. 
He’s an infernal God, and underground  
With Pluto dwells, where gold and fire abound.          30
Men to such gods their sacrificing coals  
Did not on altars lay, but pits and holes.   
Although we see celestial bodies move  
Above the earth, the earth we till and love. 
So we her airs contemplate, words and heart,         35
And virtues, but we love the centric part.   
  Nor is the soul more worthy, or more fit   
For love, than this, as infinite as it.   
But in attaining this desired place 
How much they err, that set out at the face?         40
The hair a forest 3 is of ambushes, 
Of springes, snares, fetters, and manacles;  
The brow becalms us when ’tis smooth and plain, 
And when ’tis wrinkled, shipwrecks us again; 
Smooth, ’tis a paradise, where we would have         45
Immortal stay, but wrinkled ’tis a grave. 
The nose, like to the first meridian, 4 runs 
Not ’twixt an east and west, but ’twixt two suns;  
It leaves a cheek, a rosy hemisphere,  
On either side, and then directs us where         50
Upon the islands fortunate we fall, 
Not faint Canaries, but ambrosial,  
Her swelling lips, to which when we are come, 5 
We anchor there, and think ourselves at home,   
For they seem all; there Siren’s songs and there           55
Wise Delphic oracles do fill the ear.  
There, 6 in a creek where chosen pearls do swell,  
The remora, her cleaving tongue, doth dwell. 
These and the glorious promontory, her chin, 
O’erpast, and the straight Hellespont 7 between         60
The Sestos and Abydos of her breasts,  
Not of two lovers, but two loves, the nests, 
Succeeds a boundless sea, but yet thine eye  
Some island moles may scattered there descry;   
And sailing towards her India, in that way           65
Shall at her fair Atlantic navel stay. 
Though there the current be the pilot made,  
Yet, ere thou be where thou shouldst be embay’d,   
Thou shalt upon another forest set, 
Where many shipwreck, and no further get.         70
When thou art there, consider what this chase   
Misspent by thy beginning at the face. 
  Rather set out below; practise thy art; 
Some symmetry the foot hath with that part   
Which thou dost seek, and is thy map for that,          75
Lovely enough to stop, but not stay at.   
Least subject to disguise and change it is;  
Men say the devil never can change his;   
It is the emblem that hath figured  
Firmness; ’tis the first part that comes to bed.           80
Civility we see refined; the kiss,  
Which at the face began, transplanted is, 
Since to the hand, since to the imperial knee,  
Now at the papal foot delights to be.  
If kings think that the nearer way, and do           85
Rise from the foot, lovers may do so too; 
For, as free spheres move faster far than can   
Birds, whom the air resists, so may that man 
Which goes this empty and ethereal way,   
Than if at beauty’s elements 8 he stay.           90
Rich Nature in women wisely made 
Two purses, and their mouths aversely laid.  
They then, which to the lower tribute owe,   
That way which that exchequer looks must go; 
He which doth not, his error is as great,         95
As who by clyster gives the stomach meat. 

 
LOVE, a child, is ever crying;   
Please him, and he straight is flying; 
Give him, he the more is craving,   
Never satisfied with having.  
 
His desires have no measure;          5
Endless folly is his treasure;   
What he promiseth he breaketh;   
Trust not one word that he speaketh.   
 
He vows nothing but false matter;   
And to cozen you will flatter;           10
Let him gain the hand, he’ll leave you 
And still glory to deceive you.  
 
He will triumph in your wailing; 
And yet cause be of your failing:   
These his virtues are, and slighter         15
Are his gifts, his favours lighter. 
 
Feathers are as firm in staying; 
Wolves no fiercer in their preying; 
As a child then, leave him crying;  
Nor seek him so given to flying.         20
  
LOVE in a hut, with water and a crust, 
Is—Love, forgive us!—cinders, ashes, dust;   
Love in a palace is perhaps at last 
More grievous torment than a hermit’s fast:— 
That is a doubtful tale from faery land,          5
Hard for the non-elect to understand.  
Had Lycius liv’d to hand his story down,  
He might have given the moral a fresh frown, 
Or clench’d it quite: but too short was their bliss   
To breed distrust and hate, that make the soft voice hiss.          10
Besides, there, nightly, with terrific glare,   
Love, jealous grown of so complete a pair,   
Hover’d and buzz’d his wings, with fearful roar,   
Above the lintel of their chamber door,   
And down the passage cast a glow upon the floor.           15
 
  For all this came a ruin: side by side  
They were enthroned, in the even tide, 
Upon a couch, near to a curtaining  
Whose airy texture, from a golden string, 
Floated into the room, and let appear          20
Unveil’d the summer heaven, blue and clear,  
Betwixt two marble shafts:—there they reposed,  
Where use had made it sweet, with eyelids closed,  
Saving a tythe which love still open kept,   
That they might see each other while they almost slept;          25
When from the slope side of a suburb hill,   
Deafening the swallow’s twitter, came a thrill  
Of trumpets—Lycius started—the sounds fled,  
But left a thought, a buzzing in his head.   
For the first time, since first he harbour’d in         30
That purple-lined palace of sweet sin, 
His spirit pass’d beyond its golden bourn 
Into the noisy world almost forsworn.  
The lady, ever watchful, penetrant, 
Saw this with pain, so arguing a want          35
Of something more, more than her empery   
Of joys; and she began to moan and sigh   
Because he mused beyond her, knowing well 
That but a moment’s thought is passion’s passing bell.   
“Why do you sigh, fair creature?” whisper’d he:         40
“Why do you think?” return’d she tenderly:   
“You have deserted me;—where am I now? 
“Not in your heart while care weighs on your brow: 
“No, no, you have dismiss’d me; and I go  
“From your breast houseless: ay, it must be so.”           45
He answer’d, bending to her open eyes, 
Where he was mirror’d small in paradise,  
“My silver planet, both of eve and morn!  
“Why will you plead yourself so sad forlorn, 
“While I am striving how to fill my heart         50
“With deeper crimson, and a double smart? 
“How to entangle, trammel up and snare 
“Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there  
“Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?  
“Ay, a sweet kiss—you see your mighty woes.          55
“My thoughts! shall I unveil them? Listen then! 
“What mortal hath a prize, that other men 
“May be confounded and abash’d withal, 
“But lets it sometimes pace abroad majestical,  
“And triumph, as in thee I should rejoice         60
“Amid the hoarse alarm of Corinth’s voice.   
“Let my foes choke, and my friends shout afar,  
“While through the thronged streets your bridal car   
“Wheels round its dazzling spokes.”—The lady’s cheek  
Trembled; she nothing said, but, pale and meek,         65
Arose and knelt before him, wept a rain   
Of sorrows at his words; at last with pain   
Beseeching him, the while his hand she wrung,   
To change his purpose. He thereat was stung, 
Perverse, with stronger fancy to reclaim          70
Her wild and timid nature to his aim:  
Besides, for all his love, in self despite,  
Against his better self, he took delight  
Luxurious in her sorrows, soft and new.   
His passion, cruel grown, took on a hue           75
Fierce and sanguineous as ’twas possible  
In one whose brow had no dark veins to swell.   
Fine was the mitigated fury, like   
Apollo’s presence when in act to strike   
The serpent—Ha, the serpent! certes, she          80
Was none. She burnt, she lov’d the tyranny,  
And, all subdued, consented to the hour   
When to the bridal he should lead his paramour. 
Whispering in midnight silence, said the youth, 
“Sure some sweet name thou hast, though, by my truth,         85
“I have not ask’d it, ever thinking thee  
“Not mortal, but of heavenly progeny,  
“As still I do. Hast any mortal name,  
“Fit appellation for this dazzling frame? 
“Or friends or kinsfolk on the citied earth,         90
“To share our marriage feast and nuptial mirth?”   
“I have no friends,” said Lamia, “no, not one;  
“My presence in wide Corinth hardly known:   
“My parents’ bones are in their dusty urns   
“Sepulchred, where no kindled incense burns,         95
“Seeing all their luckless race are dead, save me, 
“And I neglect the holy rite for thee. 
“Even as you list invite your many guests;   
“But if, as now it seems, your vision rests  
“With any pleasure on me, do not bid           100
“Old Apollonius—from him keep me hid.” 
Lycius, perplex’d at words so blind and blank,  
Made close inquiry; from whose touch she shrank,   
Feigning a sleep; and he to the dull shade   
Of deep sleep in a moment was betray’d.           105
 
  It was the custom then to bring away 
The bride from home at blushing shut of day, 
Veil’d, in a chariot, heralded along   
By strewn flowers, torches, and a marriage song,   
With other pageants: but this fair unknown           110
Had not a friend. So being left alone, 
(Lycius was gone to summon all his kin)   
And knowing surely she could never win 
His foolish heart from its mad pompousness,  
She set herself, high-thoughted, how to dress           115
The misery in fit magnificence.  
She did so, but ’tis doubtful how and whence 
Came, and who were her subtle servitors.  
About the halls, and to and from the doors,  
There was a noise of wings, till in short space         120
The glowing banquet-room shone with wide-arched grace.   
A haunting music, sole perhaps and lone   
Supportress of the faery-roof, made moan  
Throughout, as fearful the whole charm might fade. 
Fresh carved cedar, mimicking a glade          125
Of palm and plantain, met from either side,  
High in the midst, in honour of the bride:   
Two palms and then two plantains, and so on, 
From either side their stems branch’d one to one   
All down the aisled place; and beneath all           130
There ran a stream of lamps straight on from wall to wall.  
So canopied, lay an untasted feast  
Teeming with odours. Lamia, regal drest,  
Silently paced about, and as she went, 
In pale contented sort of discontent,          135
Mission’d her viewless servants to enrich 
The fretted splendour of each nook and niche.   
Between the tree-stems, marbled plain at first, 
Came jasper pannels; then, anon, there burst 
Forth creeping imagery of slighter trees,         140
And with the larger wove in small intricacies.  
Approving all, she faded at self-will, 
And shut the chamber up, close, hush’d and still,  
Complete and ready for the revels rude,   
When dreadful guests would come to spoil her solitude.           145
 
  The day appear’d, and all the gossip rout. 
O senseless Lycius! Madman! wherefore flout  
The silent-blessing fate, warm cloister’d hours,   
And show to common eyes these secret bowers? 
The herd approach’d; each guest, with busy brain,          150
Arriving at the portal, gaz’d amain,   
And enter’d marveling: for they knew the street,   
Remember’d it from childhood all complete 
Without a gap, yet ne’er before had seen  
That royal porch, that high-built fair demesne;         155
So in they hurried all, maz’d, curious and keen:   
Save one, who look’d thereon with eye severe,   
And with calm-planted steps walk’d in austere;  
’Twas Apollonius: something too he laugh’d,  
As though some knotty problem, that had daft         160
His patient thought, had now begun to thaw,  
And solve and melt:—’twas just as he foresaw.   
 
  He met within the murmurous vestibule   
His young disciple. “’Tis no common rule, 
“Lycius,” said he, “for uninvited guest           165
“To force himself upon you, and infest 
“With an unbidden presence the bright throng 
“Of younger friends; yet must I do this wrong,  
“And you forgive me.” Lycius blush’d, and led   
The old man through the inner doors broad-spread;          170
With reconciling words and courteous mien 
Turning into sweet milk the sophist’s spleen.   
 
  Of wealthy lustre was the banquet-room, 
Fill’d with pervading brilliance and perfume:   
Before each lucid pannel fuming stood          175
A censer fed with myrrh and spiced wood,  
Each by a sacred tripod held aloft, 
Whose slender feet wide-swerv’d upon the soft   
Wool-woofed carpets: fifty wreaths of smoke  
From fifty censers their light voyage took           180
To the high roof, still mimick’d as they rose   
Along the mirror’d walls by twin-clouds odorous.   
Twelve sphered tables, by silk seats insphered, 
High as the level of a man’s breast rear’d   
On libbard’s paws, upheld the heavy gold          185
Of cups and goblets, and the store thrice told  
Of Ceres’ horn, and, in huge vessels, wine   
Came from the gloomy tun with merry shine.   
Thus loaded with a feast the tables stood,   
Each shrining in the midst the image of a God.          190
 
  When in an antichamber every guest   
Had felt the cold full sponge to pleasure press’d, 
By minist’ring slaves, upon his hands and feet, 
And fragrant oils with ceremony meet   
Pour’d on his hair, they all mov’d to the feast         195
In white robes, and themselves in order placed  
Around the silken couches, wondering   
Whence all this mighty cost and blaze of wealth could spring.  
 
  Soft went the music the soft air along, 
While fluent Greek a vowel’d undersong         200
Kept up among the guests discoursing low  
At first, for scarcely was the wine at flow; 
But when the happy vintage touch’d their brains,   
Louder they talk, and louder come the strains   
Of powerful instruments:—the gorgeous dyes,          205
The space, the splendour of the draperies,   
The roof of awful richness, nectarous cheer, 
Beautiful slaves, and Lamia’s self, appear,  
Now, when the wine has done its rosy deed,   
And every soul from human trammels freed,         210
No more so strange; for merry wine, sweet wine, 
Will make Elysian shades not too fair, too divine. 
Soon was God Bacchus at meridian height;  
Flush’d were their cheeks, and bright eyes double bright:   
Garlands of every green, and every scent          215
From vales deflower’d, or forest-trees branch rent,   
In baskets of bright osier’d gold were brought  
High as the handles heap’d, to suit the thought 
Of every guest; that each, as he did please, 
Might fancy-fit his brows, silk-pillow’d at his ease.         220
 
  What wreath for Lamia? What for Lycius? 
What for the sage, old Apollonius?  
Upon her aching forehead be there hung 
The leaves of willow and of adder’s tongue;  
And for the youth, quick, let us strip for him          225
The thyrsus, that his watching eyes may swim 
Into forgetfulness; and, for the sage, 
Let spear-grass and the spiteful thistle wage   
War on his temples. Do not all charms fly 
At the mere touch of cold philosophy?          230
There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:   
We know her woof, her texture; she is given  
In the dull catalogue of common things.   
Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings, 
Conquer all mysteries by rule and line,           235
Empty the haunted air, and gnomed mine—   
Unweave a rainbow, as it erewhile made 
The tender-person’d Lamia melt into a shade. 
 
  By her glad Lycius sitting, in chief place,   
Scarce saw in all the room another face,          240
Till, checking his love trance, a cup he took   
Full brimm’d, and opposite sent forth a look 
’Cross the broad table, to beseech a glance  
From his old teacher’s wrinkled countenance, 
And pledge him. The bald-head philosopher         245
Had fix’d his eye, without a twinkle or stir 
Full on the alarmed beauty of the bride,  
Brow-beating her fair form, and troubling her sweet pride.  
Lycius then press’d her hand, with devout touch,   
As pale it lay upon the rosy couch:         250
’Twas icy, and the cold ran through his veins;  
Then sudden it grew hot, and all the pains   
Of an unnatural heat shot to his heart.   
“Lamia, what means this? Wherefore dost thou start?   
“Know’st thou that man?” Poor Lamia answer’d not.          255
He gaz’d into her eyes, and not a jot  
Own’d they the lovelorn piteous appeal:   
More, more he gaz’d: his human senses reel:  
Some hungry spell that loveliness absorbs;   
There was no recognition in those orbs.           260
“Lamia!” he cried—and no soft-toned reply.   
The many heard, and the loud revelry   
Grew hush; the stately music no more breathes;  
The myrtle sicken’d in a thousand wreaths.   
By faint degrees, voice, lute, and pleasure ceased;           265
A deadly silence step by step increased,  
Until it seem’d a horrid presence there,  
And not a man but felt the terror in his hair.  
“Lamia!” he shriek’d; and nothing but the shriek   
With its sad echo did the silence break.          270
“Begone, foul dream!” he cried, gazing again 
In the bride’s face, where now no azure vein 
Wander’d on fair-spaced temples; no soft bloom  
Misted the cheek; no passion to illume 
The deep-recessed vision:—all was blight;         275
Lamia, no longer fair, there sat a deadly white.   
“Shut, shut those juggling eyes, thou ruthless man!   
“Turn them aside, wretch! or the righteous ban  
“Of all the Gods, whose dreadful images   
“Here represent their shadowy presences,          280
“May pierce them on the sudden with the thorn   
“Of painful blindness; leaving thee forlorn, 
“In trembling dotage to the feeblest fright  
“Of conscience, for their long offended might,  
“For all thine impious proud-heart sophistries,         285
“Unlawful magic, and enticing lies. 
“Corinthians! look upon that gray-beard wretch! 
“Mark how, possess’d, his lashless eyelids stretch 
“Around his demon eyes! Corinthians, see! 
“My sweet bride withers at their potency.”           290
“Fool!” said the sophist, in an under-tone   
Gruff with contempt; which a death-nighing moan 
From Lycius answer’d, as heart-struck and lost, 
He sank supine beside the aching ghost.   
“Fool! Fool!” repeated he, while his eyes still         295
Relented not, nor mov’d; “from every ill  
“Of life have I preserv’d thee to this day,  
“And shall I see thee made a serpent’s prey? 
Then Lamia breath’d death breath; the sophist’s eye,  
Like a sharp spear, went through her utterly,           300
Keen, cruel, perceant, stinging: she, as well   
As her weak hand could any meaning tell,  
Motion’d him to be silent; vainly so,  
He look’d and look’d again a level—No! 
“A Serpent!” echoed he; no sooner said,           305
Than with a frightful scream she vanished:   
And Lycius’ arms were empty of delight,   
As were his limbs of life, from that same night.   
On the high couch he lay!—his friends came round—  
Supported him—no pulse, or breath they found,           310
And, in its marriage robe, the heavy body wound.


 
A PITY beyond all telling  
Is hid in the heart of love:  
The folk who are buying and selling,   
The clouds on their journey above,  
The cold, wet winds ever blowing,           5
And the shadowy hazel grove   
Where mouse-grey waters are flowing 
Threaten the head that I love.   
 
STRONG Son of God, immortal Love,   
  Whom we, that have not seen thy face,   
  By faith, and faith alone, embrace,  
Believing where we cannot prove; 
 
Thine are these orbs of light and shade;          5
  Thou madest Life in man and brute;   
  Thou madest Death; and lo, thy foot  
Is on the skull which thou hast made.  
 
Thou wilt not leave us in the dust: 
  Thou madest man, he knows not why;           10
  He thinks he was not made to die; 
And thou hast made him: thou art just. 
 
Thou seemest human and divine,   
  The highest, holiest manhood, thou:  
  Our wills are ours, we know not how;         15
Our wills are ours, to make them thine.   
 
Our little systems have their day;  
  They have their day and cease to be: 
  They are but broken lights of thee,  
And thou, O Lord, art more than they.          20
 
We have but faith: we cannot know;  
  For knowledge is of things we see;   
  And yet we trust it comes from thee, 
A beam in darkness: let it grow. 
  
I WANT to die while you love me, 
  While yet you hold me fair, 
While laughter lies upon my lips 
  And lights are in my hair.  
 
I want to die while you love me,         5
  And bear to that still bed, 
Your kisses turbulent, unspent   
  To warm me when I’m dead.   
 
I want to die while you love me  
  Oh, who would care to live          10
Till love has nothing more to ask   
  And nothing more to give!   
 
I want to die while you love me  
  And never, never see  
The glory of this perfect day         15
  Grow dim or cease to be. 
 


OVER the mountains    
  And over the waves,    
Under the fountains   
  And under the graves;  
Under floods that are deepest,            5
  Which Neptune obey,    
Over rocks that are steepest,  
  Love will find out the way.  
 
When there is no place   
  For the glow-worm to lie,     10
When there is no space   
  For receipt of a fly;  
When the midge dares not venture  
  Lest herself fast she lay,   
If Love come, he will enter     15
  And will find out the way.   
 
You may esteem him    
  A child for his might;    
Or you may deem him   
  A coward for his flight;   20
But if she whom Love doth honour  
  Be conceal'd from the day—   
Set a thousand guards upon her,   
  Love will find out the way.  
 
Some think to lose him    25
  By having him confined;   
And some do suppose him,    
  Poor heart! to be blind;  
But if ne'er so close ye wall him,   
  Do the best that ye may,   30
Blind Love, if so ye call him,    
  He will find out his way.    
 
You may train the eagle  
  To stoop to your fist;    
Or you may inveigle    35
  The Phoenix of the east;  
The lioness, you may move her  
  To give over her prey;    
But you'll ne'er stop a lover—    
  He will find out the way.     40
 
If the earth it should part him,  
  He would gallop it o'er;  
If the seas should o'erthwart him,   
  He would swim to the shore;  
Should his Love become a swallow,     45
  Through the air to stray,    
Love will lend wings to follow,   
  And will find out the way.   
 
There is no striving  
  To cross his intent;    50
There is no contriving   
  His plots to prevent;  
But if once the message greet him    
  That his True Love doth stay,   
If Death should come and meet him,    55
  Love will find out the way!  

 
WHAT word is that, that changeth not,  
Though it be turn’d and made in twain? 
It is mine Anna, God it wot,  
The only causer of my pain;   
My love that meedeth with disdain.          5
  Yet is it loved, what will you more? 
  It is my salve, and eke my sore.  
 
  
I LOVE my life, but not too well 
  To give it to thee like a flower, 
So it may pleasure thee to dwell 
  Deep in its perfume but an hour.  
I love my life, but not too well.           5
 
I love my life, but not too well 
  To sing it note by note away,  
So to thy soul the song may tell 
  The beauty of the desolate day.   
I love my life, but not too well.           10
 
I love my life but not too well  
  To cast it like a cloak on thine, 
Against the storms that sound and swell   
  Between thy lonely heart and mine.   
I love my life, but not too well.           15
 
 
PHŒBUS, 1 arise!  
And paint the sable skies  
With azure, white, and red;   
Rouse Memnon’s mother 2 from her Tithon’s bed,  
That she thy carriere 3 may with roses spread;          5
The nightingales thy coming each-where sing; 
Make an eternal Spring! 
Give life to this dark world which lieth dead;  
Spread forth thy golden hair  
In larger locks than thou wast wont before,          10
And emperor-like decore 
With diadem of pearl thy temples fair: 
Chase hence the ugly night 
Which serves but to make dear thy glorious light.  
—This is that happy morn,          15
That day, long-wishèd day  
Of all my life so dark, 
(If cruel stars have not my ruin sworn 
And fates not hope betray),   
Which, only white, deserves           20
A diamond for ever should it mark.  
This is the morn should bring unto this grove   
My Love, to hear and recompense my love.  
Fair King, who all preserves, 
But show thy blushing beams,          25
And thou two sweeter eyes  
Shalt see than those which by Penèus’ streams 4 
Did once thy heart surprise.  
Nay, suns, which shine as clear  
As thou when two thou did to Rome appear. 5          30
Now, Flora, deck thyself in fairest guise:   
If that ye, winds, would hear 
A voice surpassing far Amphion’s lyre, 
Your stormy chiding stay;  
Let Zephyr only breathe,           35
And with her tresses play. 
Kissing sometimes these purple ports of death. 6   
—The winds all silent are, 
And Phœbus in his chair 
Ensaffroning sea and air           40
Makes vanish every star:   
Night like a drunkard reels 7 
Beyond the hills, to shun his flaming wheels:   
The fields with flowers are deck’d in every hue,   
The clouds with orient gold spangle their blue; 8          45
Here is the pleasant place—   
And everything, save Her, who all should grace. 
 
O LOVE, how thou art tired out with rhyme!   
Thou art a tree whereon all poets clime;  
And from thy branches every one takes some   
Of thy sweet fruit, which Fancy feeds upon.  
But now thy tree is left so bare and poor,           5
That they can scarcely gather one plumb more.   
  
WHEN our glowing dreams were dead,  
Ruined our heroic piles,   
Something in your dark eyes said:   
“Think no more of love or smiles.”  
 
Something in me still would say,         5
“Though our dreamland palace goes,  
I have seen how in decay   
Still the wild rose clings and blows.” 
 
But your dark eyes willed it thus:  
“Build our lofty dream again:         10
Let our palace rise o’er us:  
Love can never be till then.” 
  
  SINCE love is such as that ye wot 
Cannot always be wisely used; 
I say therefore then blame me not,  
Though I therein have been abused.  
For as with cause I am accused,          5
Guilty I grant such was my lot;  
And though it cannot be excused, 
Yet let such folly be forgot. 
  For in my years of reckless youth 
Methought the power of love so great;          10
That to his laws I bound my truth,  
And to my will there was no let. 
Me list no more so far to fet;   
Such fruit! lo! as of love ensu’th; 
The gain was small that was to get,         15
And of the loss the less the ruth.  
  And few there is but first or last,  
A time in love once shall they have;   
And glad I am my time is past,   
Henceforth my freedom to withsave.          20
Now in my heart there shall I grave 
The granted grace that now I taste; 
Thanked be fortune that me gave  
So fair a gift, so sure and fast.   
  Now such as have me seen ere this,           25
When youth in me set forth his kind;   
And folly framed my thought amiss,  
The fault whereof now well I find;  
Lo! since that so it is assign’d,   
That unto each a time there is,          30
Then blame the lot that led my mind,   
Some time to live in love’s bliss.  
  But from henceforth I do protest, 
By proof of that that I have past,  
Shall never cease within my breast          35
The power of Love so late outcast:  
The knot thereof is knit full fast, 
And I thereto so sure profess’d  
For evermore with me to last  
The power wherein I am possess’d.           40
 
 
I SAW a vision yesternight 
Enough to sate a Seeker’s 1 sight;  
I wished myself a Shaker 2 there,   
And her quick pants my trembling sphere.  
It was a she so glittering bright,          5
You’d think her soul an Adamite; 3  
A person of so rare a frame,  
Her body might be lined with the same. 
Beauty’s chiefest maid of honour,   
You may break Lent with looking on her.           10
  Not the fair Abbess of the skies 4   
  With all her nunnery of eyes   
  Can show me such a glorious prize!   
 
And yet because ’tis more renown 
To make a shadow shine, she’s brown,—          15
A brown for which Heaven would disband 
The galaxy and stars be tanned;  
Brown by reflection as her eye   
Dazzle’s the summer’s livery. 
Old dormant windows must confess         20
Her beams their glimmering spectacles; 
Struck with the splendour of her face  
Do the office of a burning glass.   
  Now where such radiant lights have shown   
  No wonder if her cheeks be grown          25
  Sunburned, with lustre of her own.   
 
My sight took pay but (thank my charms!)  
I now impale her in mine arms,—  
(Love’s compasses confining you, 
Good angels, to a circle too.)           30
Is not the universe straight-laced  
When I can clasp it in the waist?   
My amorous folds about thee hurled  
With Drake I girdle in the world;   
I hoop the firmament, and make           35
This, my embrace, the zodiac. 
  How could thy center take my sense   
  When admiration doth commence  
  At the extreme circumference?  
 
Now to the melting kiss that sips           40
The jellied philtre of her lips; 
So sweet there is no tongue can praise’t  
Till transubstantiate with a taste. 
Inspired like Mahomet from above 
By the billing of my heavenly dove          45
Love prints his signets in her smacks, 
Those ruddy drops of squeezing wax, 
Which, wheresoever she imparts,  
They’ve privy seals to take up hearts. 
  Our mouths encountering at the sport         50
  My slippery soul had quit the fort   
  But that she stopped the sally-port. 
 
Next to these sweets, her lips dispence   
(As twin conserves of eloquence,)   
The sweet perfume of her breath affords,          55
Incorporating with her words. 
No rosary this votress needs,—   
Her very syllables are beads; 
No sooner ’twixt those rubies born, 
But jewels are in ear-rings worn.           60
With that delight her speech doth enter;  
It is a kiss of the second venter. 5   
  And I dissolve at what I hear  
  As if another Rosamond were 
  Couched in the labyrinth of my ear.          65
  
WHEN I have seen by Time’s fell hand defaced 
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;   
When sometime-lofty towers I see down-razed, 
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;   
When I have seen the hungry ocean gain         5
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore, 
And the firm soil win of the watery main, 
Increasing store with loss and loss with store; 
When I have seen such interchange of state,  
Or state itself confounded to decay,—          10
Ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate—  
That Time will come and take my Love away.   
  This thought is as a death, which cannot choose  
  But weep to have that which it fears to lose. 
 
FAST-ANCHOR’D, eternal, O love! O woman I love!  
O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!    
—Then separate, as disembodied, or another born,    
Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation;   
I ascend—I float in the regions of your love, O man,           5
O sharer of my roving life.    

FAST-ANCHOR’D, eternal, O love! O woman I love!  
O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!    
—Then separate, as disembodied, or another born,    
Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation;   
I ascend—I float in the regions of your love, O man,           5
O sharer of my roving life.    

 
Translated by Sir Thomas Wyatt

I FIND no peace, and all my war is done;  
  I fear and hope, I burn and freeze likewise;  
  I fly above the wind, yet cannot rise;  
  And nought I have, yet all the world I seize on; 
That looseth, nor locketh, holdeth me in prison,           5
  And holds me not, yet can I ’scape no wise;   
  Nor lets me live, nor die, at my devise,   
  And yet of death it giveth none occasion.  
Without eyes I see, and without tongue I plain; 
  I wish to perish, yet I ask for health;         10
  I love another, and yet I hate myself;  
I feed in sorrow, and laugh in all my pain;  
  Lo, thus displeaseth me both death and life,  
  And my delight is causer of my grief.   
 
AND Prevye Thought, rejoycing of hym-self,   
Stode not fer thens in abite mervelous;   
‘Yon is,’ thought I, ‘som sprite or [els] som elf, 
His sotill image is so curious:  
How is,’ quod I, ‘that he is shaded thus          5
With yonder cloth, I note 1 of what coloure?’   
And nere I went and gan to lere and pore, 
 
And framed him a question full hard.   
‘What is,’ quod I, ‘the thyng thou lovest best? 
Or what is bote 2 unto thy paynës hard?           10
Me think thou livest here in grete unrest,   
Thow wandrest ay from south to est and west, 
And est to north; as fer as I can see, 
There is no place in courte may holden the.  
 
‘Whom folowest thow? where is thy harte iset?           15
But my demaunde asoile 3 I thee require.’ 
‘Me thoughte,’ quod he, ‘no creature may lette  
Me to ben here and where as I desire:  
For where as absence hath don out the fire,  
My mery thought it kyndelith yet agayn,           20
That bodily me thinke with my souverayne  
 
‘I stand and speke, and laugh, and kisse, and halse, 4   
So that my thought comforteth me ful ofte:   
I think, God wot, though all the world be false,   
I wil be trewe; I think also how softe         25
My lady is in speche, and this on-lofte   
Bryngeth myn harte in joye and grete gladnesse; 
This prevey thought alayeth myne hevynesse.  
 
‘And what I thinke or where to be, no man 
In all this erth can tell, iwis, but I:           30
And eke there nys no swalowe swifte, ne swan 
So wight 5 of wyng, ne half so yerne 6 can flye;   
For I can ben, and that right sodenly, 
In Heven, in Helle, in Paradise, and here,   
And with my lady, whan I wil desire.           35
 
‘I am of councell ferre and wide, I wot,  
With lord and lady, and here 7 privité 
I wot it all; and be it cold or hoot,  
Thay shalle not speke withoute licence of me.   
I mynde, in suche as sesonable 8 bee,          40
Tho 9 first the thing is thought withyn the harte, 
Er any worde out from the mouth astarte.’
*        *        *        *        *
And furth the cokkowe gan procede anon,   
With ‘Benedictus’ thankyng God in haste,  
That in this May wold visite hem echon,           45
And gladden hem all while the feste shall laste:   
And therewithal a loughter out he braste, 
‘I thanke it God that I shuld ende the song, 
And all the service which hath ben so long.’ 
 
Thus sange thay all the service of the feste,           50
And that was done right erly, to my dome; 10 
And furth goth all the courte, bothe moste and leste, 
To feche the flourës fressh, and braunche and blome;  
And namly hawthorn brought both page and grome, 
With fressh garlantis, partie blewe and white,          55
And hem rejoysen in her grete delite.  
 
HE who knows Love—becomes Love, and his eyes 
  Behold Love in the heart of everyone,   
  Even the loveless: as the light of the sun 
Is one with all it touches. He is wise 
With undivided wisdom, for he lies          5
  In Wisdom’s arms. His wanderings are done, 
  For he has found the Source whence all things run—  
The guerdon of the quest, that satisfies. 
 LOVE 1 guards the roses of thy lips   
  And flies about them like a bee;  
If I approach he forward skips,  
  And if I kiss he stingeth me.  
  
(1917)

I WALK alone and cry out under the stars. 
As one in a desert I hunger for refreshment. 
I have need of the coolness of some azure pool. 
O, I would anoint my bosom with the clear water!   
O, I would immerse myself in the emulous depths!           5
O, I would drink of ineffable dreams.  
You, Beloved, are the silvery lake shimmering in the desert of my youth.   
You only can allay the fever of my spirit!   
On your lips I should drain the fountain of life.  
On your white breast I shall breath the perfume of numberless lilies.           10
Therein I shall die a thousand deaths and arise reborn in the awful splendor of your love….
*        *        *        *        *
LAY your hands,—softer than dove’s wings,—in my hands so I may feel your young life flowing into mine thro’ your finger-tips. 
Lay your eyes upon my eyes that I may grow tremulous beneath the flutter of your eyelids. 
Lay your heart against my heart that I may hear your love summoning me to forgetfulness.  
Lay your tresses about me that I may feel their warm sun streaming thro’ my veins.          15
Lay your mouth on my mouth until all dissolves in mist about me…. 
                (Is it life? Is it death?)
*        *        *        *        *
YOU are as a million birds that sing unto my heart, O, Beloved.   
Thro’ the long nights I hear the chanting of blithe voices. 
What divine minstrelsy! what ravishment….         20
Is this multitudinous melody the rapture of your kiss?   
Come to me, press upon my brow the coolness of your young lips that I may hear the thunder of your love in the night….
*        *        *        *        *
When will it end, the long vigil….  
What dawn will bring you forever unto me, O, my Beloved? 
Life is but shadow.          25
Only you, my Beloved, are more real than shadow.   
Beneath your caresses I am as one awakened unto life. 
Your finger-tips bear presage of divinity. Your heart-beats are a threnody sublime. 
O, Beloved, you are as a white nenuphar lifting its snowy breast on a stream. In your bosom are all the treasures of Elysium. The scent of your skin is like jasmine and honeysuckle.  
Why is such loveliness withheld from me, O, Beloved?          30
When can I look upon you and say: “Beloved! all this beauty is mine forever.” 
When will it end, the long vigil….
*        *        *        *        *
O, MIRACLE of love!  
You whom I adore unto delirium,  
Your arms are white lilies upon my bosom.         35
Stars encircle me when your lips lean down to mine. There is the sound of many waters falling. There is the murmur of a million nightingales,—and the flash of brilliant lightning. 
Caress celestial! 
Moon-path of my dreams! 
O, miracle of Love—my divinity and my crucifixion….
*        *        *        *        *
WHEN the young moon silvers the sky, the earth is ours,          40
We shall go into the forest and wander in the shadow of the pines.   
I shall cover you with leaves, and we shall lie on the soft moss entwined like sisters.   
And all the while I will know that the fragrance of your skin is sweeter to me than the perfumes of a million roses….
*        *        *        *        *
LET me enfold you in my hair. 
Let me wind you as in a golden skein.          45
Give me the curve of your throat, milky white and rose, that I may place about it the glossy fillets of my hair.  
Don it as a shining mantilla….   
Let my hair shower about you until you are radiant with perfume;  
Let it ripple over you like the wind on summer wheat. 
Then give me your lips that we may stand united beneath the downpour of its sunlight.          50
Let us be intermingled as two trees that have bent one single root….
*        *        *        *        *
IT rains, Beloved….  
The dripping of the rain is like the cool kisses of your mouth….  
I faint beneath the rapture of your lips. 
Be no longer tender.         55
Cover me with frenzied kisses,—even as I would drench my body in the cruel torrents of the rain.   
Envelop me from throat to ankle in delirium intolerable….   
*        *        *        *        *
TO love you like the midnight storm!   
To take you swooning unto death as the wind sweeps the waves in tempest!           60
To transport you unto delirium!  
To hear the wild beating of your veins; to feel flame shuddering your blood and to agonize you with my ardor.  
To crush you as a flower upon my breast,  
To bear you away to some secret valley where I would love you unto insensibility….
*        *        *        *        *
IF I think of you, I quiver from head to foot.          65
If I think of you tears flood my eyes. 
If I pass you my heart quickens to suffocation and the blood seems to leave my body.   
If I look into your eyes a sudden fire burns in my veins.   
If I touch you I am as one possessed with madness; my arms tremble and my limbs totter beneath me. 
To love you is to suffer the pangs of an intolerable agony.
*        *        *        *        *
        70

PART FIRST
MY dear and only love, I pray,   
  This noble world of thee 
Be governed by no other sway  
  But purest monarchie. 
For if confusion have a part,         5
  Which virtuous souls abhore,   
And hold a synod in thy heart,   
  I ’ll never love thee more. 
 
Like Alexander I will reign,  
  And I will reign alone,          10
My thoughts shall evermore disdain  
  A rival on my throne. 
He either fears his fate too much,  
  Or his deserts are small,   
That puts it not unto the touch,         15
  To win or lose it all.   
 
But I must rule and govern still 
  And always give the law, 
And have each subject at my will,   
  And all to stand in awe.         20
But ’gainst my battery if I find 
  Thou shun’st the prize so sore 
As that thou set’st me up a blind,  
  I ’ll never love thee more. 
 
If in the empire of thy heart,           25
  Where I should solely be,   
Another do pretend a part, 
  And dares to vie with me;   
Or if committees thou erect,  
  And go on such a score,          30
I ’ll sing and laugh at thy neglect,   
  And never love thee more.   
 
But if thou wilt be constant then,  
  And faithful of thy word,   
I ’ll make thee glorious by my pen,         35
  And famous by my sword.  
I ’ll serve thee in such noble ways 
  Was never heard before;  
I ’ll crown and deck thee all with bays,  
  And love thee ever more.         40
 
PART SECOND
My dear and only love, take heed,   
  Lest thou thyself expose,   
And let all longing lovers feed  
  Upon such looks as those.   
A marble wall then build about,          45
  Beset without a door; 
But if thou let thy heart fly out,  
  I ’ll never love thee more. 
 
Let not their oaths, like volleys shot,   
  Make any breach at all;          50
Nor smoothness of their language plot  
  Which way to scale the wall;   
Nor balls of wild-fire love consume 
  The shrine which I adore;   
For if such smoke about thee fume,          55
  I ’ll never love thee more. 
 
I think thy virtues be too strong   
  To suffer by surprise;   
Those victualled by my love so long,   
  The siege at length must rise,         60
And leave thee rulèd in that health 
  And state thou wast before; 
But if thou turn a commonwealth, 
  I ’ll never love thee more. 
 
Or if by fraud, or by consent,           65
  Thy heart to ruine come, 
I ’ll sound no trumpet as I wont,   
  Nor march by tuck of drum;  
But hold my arms, like ensigns, up, 
  Thy falsehood to deplore,           70
And bitterly will sigh and weep, 
  And never love thee more.   
 
I ’ll do with thee as Nero did   
  When Rome was set on fire,  
Not only all relief forbid,           75
  But to a hill retire, 
And scorn to shed a tear to see  
  Thy spirit grown so poor;   
But smiling sing, until I die,   
  I ’ll never love thee more.         80
 
Yet, for the love I bare thee once, 
  Lest that thy name should die, 
A monument of marble-stone 
  The truth shall testifie;   
That every pilgrim passing by         85
  May pity and deplore  
My case, and read the reason why 
  I can love thee no more. 
 
The golden laws of love shall be 
  Upon this pillar hung,—          90
A simple heart, a single eye, 
  A true and constant tongue; 
Let no man for more love pretend 
  Than he has hearts in store;   
True love begun shall never end;         95
  Love one and love no more.  
 
Then shall thy heart be set by mine,   
  But in far different case;  
For mine was true, so was not thine,   
  But lookt like Janus’ face.         100
For as the waves with every wind,   
  So sail’st thou every shore,   
And leav’st my constant heart behind,— 
  How can I love thee more?   
 
My heart shall with the sun be fixed           105
  For constancy most strange, 
And thine shall with the moon be mixed,   
  Delighting ay in change. 
Thy beauty shined at first more bright,   
  And woe is me therefore,         110
That ever I found thy love so light 
  I could love thee no more!  
 
The misty mountains, smoking lakes, 
  The rocks’ resounding echo, 
The whistling wind that murmur makes,          115
  Shall with me sing hey ho!  
The tossing seas, the tumbling boats,  
  Tears dropping from each shore,   
Shall tune with me their turtle notes— 
  I ’ll never love thee more.         120
 
As doth the turtle, chaste and true,   
  Her fellow’s death regrete, 
And daily mourns for his adieu,  
  And ne’er renews her mate;  
So, though thy faith was never fast,           125
  Which grieves me wondrous sore,   
Yet I shall live in love so chaste, 
  That I shall love no more.  
 
And when all gallants ride about 
  These monuments to view,         130
Whereon is written, in and out,  
  Thou traitorous and untrue; 
Then in a passion they shall pause, 
  And thus say, sighing sore, 
“Alas! he had too just a cause           135
  Never to love thee more.”   
 
And when that tracing goddess Fame  
  From east to west shall flee,  
She shall record it, to thy shame,  
  How thou hast lovèd me;          140
And how in odds our love was such   
  As few have been before; 
Thou loved too many, and I too much,   
  So I can love no more.   
 
LOVE thou thy land, with love far-brought 
  From out the storied past, and used  
  Within the present, but transfused   
Thro’ future time by power of thought; 
 
True love turn’d round on fixed poles,         5
  Love, that endures not sordid ends,  
  For English natures, freemen, friends,  
Thy brothers, and immortal souls.   
 
But pamper not a hasty time,  
  Nor feed with crude imaginings         10
  The herd, wild hearts and feeble wings  
That every sophister can lime.   
 
Deliver not the tasks of might   
  To weakness, neither hide the ray 
  From those, not blind, who wait for day,           15
Tho’ sitting girt with doubtful light. 
 
Make knowledge circle with the winds;  
  But let her herald, Reverence, fly   
  Before her to whatever sky  
Bear seed of men and growth of minds.          20
 
Watch what main-currents draw the years:  
  Cut Prejudice against the grain.  
  But gentle words are always gain; 
Regard the weakness of thy peers.   
 
Nor toil for title, place, or touch         25
  Of pension, neither count on praise  
  It grows to guerdon after-days.   
Nor deal in watch-words overmuch;   
 
Not clinging to some ancient saw,   
  Not master’d by some modern term,         30
  Not swift nor slow to change, but firm; 
And in its season bring the law, 
 
That from Discussion’s lip may fall 
  With Life that, working strongly, binds—   
  Set in all lights by many minds,          35
To close the interests of all.   
 
For Nature also, cold and warm,  
  And moist and dry, devising long, 
  Thro’ many agents making strong,  
Matures the individual form.          40
 
Meet is it changes should control   
  Our being, lest we rust in ease.  
  We all are changed by still degrees, 
All but the basis of the soul.   
 
So let the change which comes be free          45
  To ingroove itself with that which flies,  
  And work, a joint of state, that plies  
Its office, moved with sympathy. 
 
A saying hard to shape in act;   
  For all the past of Time reveals          50
  A bridal dawn of thunder-peals,   
Wherever Thought hath wedded Fact.  
 
Even now we hear with inward strife 
  A motion toiling in the gloom— 
  The Spirit of the years to come           55
Yearning to mix himself with Life.  
 
A slow-develop’d strength awaits 
  Completion in a painful school;   
  Phantoms of other forms of rule,  
New Majesties of mighty States—          60
 
The warders of the growing hour, 
  But vague in vapor, hard to mark; 
  And round them sea and air are dark  
With great contrivances of Power.   
 
Of many changes, aptly join’d,           65
  Is bodied forth the second whole. 
  Regard gradation, lest the soul   
Of Discord race the rising wind; 
 
A wind to puff your idol-fires,  
  And heap their ashes on the head;         70
  To shame the boast so often made, 
That we are wiser than our sires.   
 
O, yet, if Nature’s evil star 
  Drive men in manhood, as in youth,   
  To follow flying steps of Truth           75
Across the brazen bridge of war— 
 
If New and Old, disastrous feud, 
  Must ever shock, like armed foes, 
  And this be true, till Time shall close 
That Principles are rain’d in blood;           80
 
Not yet the wise of heart would cease  
  To hold his hope thro’ shame and guilt, 
  But with his hand against the hilt,  
Would pace the troubled land, like Peace; 
 
Not less, tho’ dogs of Faction bay,         85
  Would serve his kind in deed and word,  
  Certain, if knowledge bring the sword,  
That knowledge takes the sword away—   
 
Would love the gleams of love that broke  
  From either side, nor veil his eyes;         90
  And if some dreadful need should rise   
Would strike, and firmly, and one stroke. 
 
To-morrow yet would reap to-day, 
  As we bear blossom of the dead;   
  Earn well the thrifty months, nor wed           95
Raw Haste, half-sister to Delay.
I SEE you coming toward me….  

WHAT have I to say to you  
When we shall meet?  
Yet—  
I lie here thinking of you.   
 
  The stain of love          5
Is upon the world.   
Yellow, yellow, yellow, 
It eats into the leaves,   
Smears with saffron  
The horned branches that lean         10
Heavily  
Against a smooth purple sky.  
 
  There is no light— 
Only a honey-thick stain   
That drips from leaf to leaf          15
And limb to limb, 
Spoiling the colors  
Of the whole world.  
 
  I am alone.  
The weight of love           20
Has buoyed me up  
Till my head   
Knocks against the sky. 
 
  See me!   
My hair is dripping with nectar—         25
Starlings carry it   
On their black wings.   
See, at last   
My arms and my hands 
Are lying idle.           30
 
  How can I tell  
If I shall ever love you again   

 
SHE casts a spell, oh, casts a spell!  
Which haunts me more than I can tell.  
Dearer, because she makes me ill 
Than who would will to make me well.   
 
She is my store! oh, she my store!          5
Whose grey eye wounded me so sore,  
Who will not place in mine her palm,   
Nor love, nor calm me any more.  
 
She is my pet, oh, she my pet!   
Whom I can never more forget;         10
Who would not lose by me one moan,  
Nor stone upon my cairn would set.  
 
She is my roon, oh, she my roon! 
Who tells me nothing, leaves me soon;  
Who would not lose by me one sigh,          15
Were death and I within one room.   
 
She is my dear, oh, she my dear! 
Who cares not whether I be here. 
Who will not weep when I am dead,   
But makes me shed the silent tear.          20
 
Hard my case, oh, hard my case!  
For in her eye no hope I trace,  
She will not hear me any more,   
But I adore her silent face.  
 
She is my choice, oh, she my choice!           25
Who never made me to rejoice; 
Who caused my heart to ache so oft, 
Who put no softness in her voice.   
 
Great my grief, oh, great my grief! 
Neglected, scorned beyond belief,           30
By her who looks at me askance,  
By her who grants me no relief.  
 
She’s my desier, oh, my desire!  
More glorious than the bright sun’s fire; 
Who were than wild-blown ice more cold         35
Were I so bold as to sit by her. 
 
She it is who stole my heart, 
And left a void and aching smart;   
But if she soften not her eye,   
I know that life and I must part.

 
JESUS! why dost Thou love me so? 
  What hast Thou seen in me   
To make my happiness so great,   
  So dear a joy to Thee?   
 
Wert Thou not God, I then might think          5
  Thou hadst no eye to read   
The badness of that selfish heart,  
  For which Thine own did bleed. 
 
But Thou art God, and knowest all;  
  Dear Lord! Thou knowest me;         10
And yet Thy knowledge hinders not   
  Thy love’s sweet liberty.   
 
Ah, how Thy grace hath wooed my soul   
  With persevering wiles!  
Now give me tears to weep; for tears           15
  Are deeper joy than smiles. 
 
Each proof renewed of Thy great love   
  Humbles me more and more,   
And brings to light forgotten sins, 
  And lays them at my door.           20
 
The more I love Thee, Lord! the more   
  I hate my own cold heart;   
The more Thou woundest me with love,   
  The more I feel the smart.  
 
What shall I do, then, dearest Lord!           25
  Say, shall I fly from Thee, 
And hide my poor unloving self   


BEHOLD, thou art fair, my love; behold thou art fair; 
Thou hast doves’ eyes within thy locks:   
Thy hair is as a flock of goats, 
That appear from mount Gilead.   
Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn,         5
Which came up from the washing;  
Whereof every one bear twins, 
And none is barren among them.   
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, 
And thy speech is comely:          10
Thy temples are like a piece of pomegranate  
Within thy locks. 
Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armory,  
Whereon there hang a thousand bucklers,   
All shields of mighty men.         15
Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins,  
Which feed among the lilies.  
Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, 
I will get me to the mountain of myrrh,   
And to the hill of frankincense.         20
Thou art all fair, my love;   
There is no spot in thee.  
Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse,  
With me from Lebanon:   
Look from the top of Amana,           25
From the top of Shenir and Hermon,  
From the lions’ dens,   
From the mountains of the leopards. 
Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; 
Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes,           30
With one chain of thy neck.   
How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse!  
How much better is thy love than wine! 
And the smell of thine ointments than all spices!  
Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb:           35
Honey and milk are under thy tongue;   
And the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon. 
A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse;   
A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.   
Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits:          40
Camphire, with spikenard,  
Spikenard and saffron;  
Calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; 
Myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices:  
A fountain of gardens,          45
A well of living waters,   
And streams from Lebanon.  
Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south:   
Blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.  
Let my beloved come into his garden,           50
And eat his pleasant fruits.
I LOVE my life, but not too well 
  To give it to thee like a flower, 
So it may pleasure thee to dwell 
  Deep in its perfume but an hour.  
I love my life, but not too well.           5
 
I love my life, but not too well 
  To sing it note by note away,  
So to thy soul the song may tell 
  The beauty of the desolate day.   
I love my life, but not too well.           10
 
I love my life, but not too well 
  To cast it like a cloak on thine, 
Against the storms that sound and swell   
  Between thy lonely heart and mine.   
I love my life, but not too well.           15
 
II
Your love is like a blue blue wave  
  The little rainbows play in.   
Your love is like a mountain cave   
  Cool shadows darkly stay in.   
 
It thrills me like great gales at war,         20
  It soothes like softest singing.  
It bears me where clear rivers are, 
  With reeds and rushes swinging;   
Or out to pearly shores afar  
  Where temple bells are ringing.           25
  
LOVE, Fortune, and my mind which do remember 
Eke that is now, and that, that once hath ben,  
Torment my heart so sore, that very often 
I hate and envy them beyond all measure.  
Love slayeth mine heart, while Fortune is depriver         5
Of all my comfort; the foolish mind then  
Burneth and plaineth, as one that very seldome  
Liveth in rest. So still in displeasure   
My pleasant days they fleet and pass;  
And daily doth mine ill change to the worse:         10
While more than half is run now of my course.   
Alas, not of steel, but of brittle glass, 
  I see that from my hand falleth my trust,  
  And all my thoughts are dashed into dust.  
 
 COULD Love for ever 
          Run like a river,   
          And Time’s endeavour   
            Be tried in vain— 
          No other pleasure           5
          With this could measure:  
          And like a treasure 
            We’d hug the chain.  
          But since our sighing  
          Ends not in dying,          10
          And, form’d for flying,   
            Love plumes his wing;   
          Then for this reason   
          Let’s love a season;   
But let that season be only Spring.         15
 
          When lovers parted  
          Feel broken-hearted,   
          And, all hopes thwarted,  
            Expect to die; 
          A few years older,          20
          Ah! how much colder 
          They might behold her  
            For whom they sigh!  
          When link’d together,  
          In every weather,           25
          They pluck Love’s feather 
            From out his wing—   
          He’ll stay for ever,   
          But sadly shiver 
Without his plumage, when past the Spring.           30
 
          Like Chiefs of Faction,   
          His life is action— 
          A formal paction 
            That curbs his reign,   
          Obscures his glory,         35
          Despot no more, he  
          Such territory   
            Quits with disdain.  
          Still, still advancing,   
          With banners glancing,         40
          His power enhancing,   
            He must move on—  
          Repose but cloys him,  
          Retreat destroys him,  
Love brooks not a degraded throne.          45
 
          Wait not, fond lover!  
          Till years are over,   
          And then recover,   
            As from a dream.  
          While each bewailing           50
          The other’s failing,   
          With wrath and railing,   
            All hideous seem— 
          While first decreasing,   
          Yet not quite ceasing,         55
          Wait not till teasing  
            All passion blight:  
          If once diminish’d  
          Love reign is finish’d—   
Then part in friendship,—and bid good-night.         60
 
          So shall Affection  
          To recollection  
          The dear connection 
            Bring back with joy: 
          You had not waited          65
          Till, tired or hated,  
          Your passions sated 
            Began to coy.  
          Your last embraces  
          Leave no cold traces—          70
          The same fond faces—   
            As through the past; 
          And eyes, the mirrors  
          Of your sweet errors,  
Reflect but rapture—not least though last.           75
  O FAIREST of creation, last and best 
Of all God’s works, creature in whom excelled   
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed,  
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet! 
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,          5
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote!   
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress  
The strict forbiddance, how to violate 
The sacred fruit forbidden! Some cursèd fraud   
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown,         10
And me with thee hath ruined, for with thee  
Certain my resolution is to die. 
How can I live without thee, how forego   
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined,  
To live again in these wild woods forlorn?           15
Should God create another Eve, and I   
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee   
Would never from my heart; no, no, I feel 
The link of nature draw me: flesh of flesh,  
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state         20
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
*        *        *        *        *
However, I with thee have fixed my lot,   
Certain to undergo like doom; if death 
Consort with thee, death is to me as life;   
So forcible within my heart I feel          25
The bond of nature draw me to my own,  
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;   
Our state cannot be severed, we are one,  
One flesh; to lose thee were to lose myself. 
          True, separations   
          Ask more than patience;   

Have at you, then, affection’s men at arms.  
Consider what you first did swear unto,—          10
To fast, to study, and to see no woman;   
Flat treason ’gainst the kingly state of youth. 
Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young, 
And abstinence engenders maladies.  
And where that you have vowed to study, lords,          15
In that each of you have forsworn his book,  
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?  
For when would you, my lord,—or you,—or you,—   
Have found the ground of study’s excellence  
Without the beauty of a woman’s face?          20
From women’s eyes this doctrine I derive: 
They are the ground, the books, the academes,   
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.  
Why, universal plodding poisons up  
The nimble spirits in the arteries,         25
As motion and long-during action tires 
The sinewy vigor of the traveller.  
Now, for not looking on a woman’s face,   
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes,   
And study too, the causer of your vow;         30
For where is any author in the world   
Teaches such beauty as a woman’s eye?  
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself, 
And where we are our learning likewise is;   
Then when ourselves we see in ladies’ eyes,          35
Do we not likewise see our learning there?   
O, we have made a vow to study, lords, 
And in that vow we have forsworn our books;  
For when would you, my liege,—or you,—or you,—  
In leaden contemplation have found out         40
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes  
Of beauty’s tutors have enriched you with?   
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain,  
And therefore, finding barren practisers, 
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil;           45
But love, first learned in a lady’s eyes, 
Lives not alone immured in the brain,  
But, with the motion of all elements,  
Courses as swift as thought in every power,  
And gives to every power a double power,          50
Above their functions and their offices.  
It adds a precious seeing to the eye;  
A lover’s eyes will gaze an eagle blind;  
A lover’s ear will hear the lowest sound, 
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped;           55
Love’s feeling is more soft and sensible  
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails; 
Love’s tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste;   
For valor, is not Love a Hercules,  
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?           60
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical 
As bright Apollo’s lute, strung with his hair;  
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods 
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.   
Never durst poet touch a pen to write          65
Until his ink were tempered with Love’s sighs;  
O, then his lines would ravish savage ears   
And plant in tyrants mild humility! 
From women’s eyes this doctrine I derive: 
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;           70
They are the books, the arts, the academes,  
That show, contain, and nourish all the world,  
Else none at all in aught proves excellent.  
Then fools you were these women to forswear, 
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.         75
For wisdom’s sake, a word that all men love, 
Or for love’s sake, a word that loves all men,  
Or for men’s sake, the authors of these women,  
Or women’s sake, by whom we men are men,  
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,           80
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths. 
It is religion to be thus forsworn, 
For charity itself fulfils the law,—   
And who can sever love from charity?   
 . LOVE 1 will teach us all things: but we must learn how to win love; it is got with difficulty: it is a possession dearly bought with much labour and in long time; for one must love not sometimes only, for a passing moment, but always. There is no man who doth not sometimes love: even the wicked can do that.   1
  And let not men’s sin dishearten thee: love a man even in his sin, for that love is a likeness of the divine love, and is the summit of love on earth. Love all God’s creation, both the whole and every grain of sand. Love every leaf, every ray of light. Love the animals, love the plants, love each separate thing. If thou love each thing thou wilt perceive the mystery of God in all; and when once thou perceive this, thou wilt thenceforward grow every day to a fuller understanding of it: until thou come at last to love the whole world with a love that will then be all-embracing and universal.
 
‘The Ring and the Book’

O LYRIC Love, half-angel and half-bird 
And all a wonder and a wild desire,—   
Boldest of hearts that ever braved the sun,  
Took sanctuary within the holier blue, 
And sang a kindred soul out to his face,—         5
Yet human at the red-ripe of the heart—   
When the first summons from the darkling earth  
Reach’d thee amid thy chambers, blanch’d their blue,  
And bared them of the glory—to drop down, 
To toil for man, to suffer or to die,—         10
This is the same voice: can thy soul know change?  
Hail then, and hearken from the realms of help! 
Never may I commence my song, my due   
To God who best taught song by gift of thee, 
Except with bent head and beseeching hand—           15
That still, despite the distance and the dark,  
What was, again may be; some interchange  
Of grace, some splendour once thy very thought, 
Some benediction anciently thy smile:  
—Never conclude, but raising hand and head           20
Thither where eyes, that cannot reach, yet yearn   
For all hope, all sustainment, all reward,   
Their utmost up and on,—so blessing back  
In those thy realms of help, that heaven thy home, 
Some whiteness which, I judge, thy face makes proud,          25
Some wanness where, I think, thy foot may fall!
 
NEVER 1 seek to tell thy love,   
Love that never told can be;  
For the gentle wind does move 
Silently, invisibly. 
 
I told my love, I told my love,          5
I told her all my heart;   
Trembling, cold, in ghastly fears,  
Ah! she doth depart. 
 
Soon as she was gone from me, 
A traveller came by,         10
Silently, invisibly: 
He took her with a sigh.
          What desperations   
            From such have risen!   
          But yet remaining,          80
          What is’t but chaining 
          Hearts which, once waning,   
            Beat ’gainst their prison? 
          Time can but cloy love,   
          And use destroy love:          85
          The wingèd boy, Love,  
            Is but for boys—  
          You’ll find it torture 
          Though sharper, shorter,  
To wean, and not wear out your joys.
III
And is it pain to you   
  That we must love and part? 
Ah, if you only knew 
  The gladness in my heart!   
 
Love is enough. Each day           30
  I look upon the sun,  
He loves me! I shall say,  
  Now is my life begun. 
 
He loves me! Every night,  
  On the dark verge of sleep          35
The rapture will alight 
  And to my bosom creep.   
 
Peace, for I should not dare  
  A keener joy implore. 
My soul shall feel no care—           40
  Until you love no more.
FOR aught that ever I could read,   
Could ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run smooth:   
But, either it was different in blood, 
Or else misgraffèd in respect of years,           5
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends; 
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,   
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, 
Making it momentary as a sound,  
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;         10
Brief as the lightning in the collied night, 
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,  
And ere a man hath power to say,—Behold!  
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:  
So quick bright things come to confusion.
CHILDREN born of fairy stock  
Never need for shirt or frock,   
Never want for food or fire,  
Always get their heart’s desire: 
Jingle pockets full of gold,          5
Marry when they’re seven years old. 
Every fairy child may keep 
Two strong ponies and ten sheep; 
All have houses, each his own,   
Built of brick or granite stone;         10
They live on cherries, they run wild—  
I’d love to be a Fairy’s child.  

PALE brows, still hands and dim hair,   
I had a beautiful friend    
And dreamed that the old despair  
Would end in love in the end:  
She looked in my heart one day            5
And saw your image was there;  
She has gone weeping away.  

  Where Thou canst never see? 
 
Or shall I pray that Thy dear love  
  To me might not be given?           30
Ah, no! love must be pain on earth, 
  If it be bliss in Heaven.
LOVE is a breach in the walls, a broken gate,   
  Where that comes in that shall not go again;  
Love sells the proud heart’s citadel to Fate.   
  They have known shame, who love unloved. Even then, 
When two mouths, thirsty each for each, find slaking,         5
  And agony’s forgot, and hushed the crying  
Of credulous hearts, in heaven—such are but taking 
  Their own poor dreams within their arms, and lying  
Each in his lonely night, each with a ghost. 
  Some share that night. But they know love grows colder,          10
Grows false and dull, that was sweet lies at most. 
  Astonishment is no more in hand or shoulder,  
But darkens, and dies out from kiss to kiss. 
All this is love; and all love is but this.  

As I do now?   
Our lips meet and our eyes close.   
I feel the shuddering of your breast and the beating of your throat against mine.   
We are enveloped in darkness.         75
We know nothing but the thunder of our veins….  
We are swept out into a sea of infinite oblivion.
Love in thine eyes doth build his tower,          5
  And sleeps within his pretty shrine; 
And if I look the boy will lower,   
  And from their orbs shoot shafts divine.   
 
Love works thy heart within his fire,  
  And in my tears doth firm the same;          10
And if I tempt it will retire,   
  And of my plaints doth make a game.  
  
TO him who ever thought with love of me   
Or ever did for my sake some good deed 
I will appear, looking such charity 
And kind compassion, at his life’s last need 
That he will out of hand and heartily          5
Repent he sinned and all his sins be freed.  
FAIR is my love, when her fair golden hairs  
With the loose wind ye waving chance to mark;   
Fair, when the rose in her red cheeks appears;  
Or in her eyes the fire of love does spark.  
Fair, when her breast, like a rich-laden bark,          5
With precious merchandise she forth doth lay;   
Fair, when that cloud of pride, which oft doth dark   
Her goodly light, with smiles she drives away.  
But fairest she, when so she doth display 
The gate with pearls and rubies richly dight;           10
Through which her words so wise do make their way  
To bear the message of her gentle sprite. 
  The rest be works of nature’s wonderment:  
  But this the work of heart’s astonishment. 
 
LIKE a cradle rocking, rocking,  
  Silent, peaceful, to and fro,  
Like a mother’s sweet looks dropping   
  On the little face below,   
Hangs the green earth, swinging, turning,         5
  Jarless, noiseless, safe, and slow;  
Falls the light of God’s face bending  
  Down and watching us below. 
 
And as feeble babes that suffer, 
  Toss, and cry, and will not rest,         10
Are the ones the tender mother   
  Holds the closest, loves the best,—  
So when we are weak and wretched,   
  By our sins weighed down, distressed,   
Then it is that God’s great patience           15
  Holds us closest, loves us best.  

Love, let me cull her choicest flowers;   
  And pity me, and calm her eye; 
Make soft her heart, dissolve her lowers;         15
  Then will I praise thy deity.  
 
But if thou do not, Love, I’ll truly serve her  
In spite of thee, and by firm faith deserve her.   

He who knows Love becomes Love, and he knows 
  All beings are himself, twin-born of Love.        10
Melted in Love’s own fire, his spirit flows  
  Into all earthly forms, below, above;   
He is the breath and glamour of the rose, 
  He is the benediction of the dove.   

Eke eche at other threw the flourës brighte, 
The prymerose, the violet, and the golde; 11 
So than, as I beheld the riall 12 sighte, 
My lady gan me sodenly beholde,          60
And with a trewe love, plited many-folde, 
She smote me thrugh the very harte as blive, 13 
And Venus yet I thanke I am alive.  


Yet that’s but a preludious bliss,  
Two souls pickeering in a kiss.  
Embraces do but draw the line,   
’Tis storming that must take her in.   
When bodies join and victory hovers         70
’Twixt the equal fluttering lovers, 
This is the game; make stakes, my dear!   
Hark, how the sprightly chanticleer,   
(That Baron Tell-clock of the night,)  
Sounds boutesel to Cupid’s knight.          75
  Then have at all, the pass is got,   
  For coming off, oh, name it not!  
  Who would not die upon the spot?  


THE TWILIGHT fleeted away in pearl on the stream,  
And night, like a diamond done, stood still in our dream.   
Your eyes like burnished stones or as stars were bright  
With the sudden vision that made us one with the night.  
 
We loved in infinite spaces, forgetting here         5
The breasts that were lit with life and the lips so near;   
Till the wizard willows waved in the wind and drew 
Me away from the fulness of love and down to you.  
 
Our love was so vast that it filled the heavens up:   
But the soft white form I held was an empty cup,           10
When the willows called me back to earth with their sigh,   
And we moved as shades through the deep that was you and I.




Let knowledge grow from more to more,          25
  But more of reverence in us dwell;   
  That mind and soul, according well,  
May make one music as before, 
 
But vaster. We are fools and slight;   
  We mock thee when we do not fear:         30
  But help thy foolish ones to bear;   
Help thy vain worlds to bear thy light.   
 
Forgive what seemed my sin in me;   
  What seemed my worth since I began;  
  For merit lives from man to man,          35
And not from man, O Lord, to thee.  
 
Forgive my grief for one removed,   
  Thy creature, whom I found so fair.  
  I trust he lives in thee, and there  
I find him worthier to be loved.         40
 
Forgive these wild and wandering cries,   
  Confusions of a wasted youth;  
  Forgive them where they fail in truth,  
And in thy wisdom make me wise.  
1 
OH, love as long as you can love,   
Oh, love as long as love you may!   
The hour will come, the hour will come:   
By graves lamenting you will stay.  
 
And ever keep your heart aglow,          5
And let it foster love with care,   
As long as still another heart   
Beats with it warmly anywhere.   
 
If one unseals his breast to you,   
Ah, do him all the good you can—         10
And all his hours with gladness fill,  
And grieve him not for one hour’s span!   
 
Your tongue—ah, hold it well in check!—   
Is quick to say an evil word. 
Oh God, it was not meant so ill!         15
Yet pained he turns away who heard. 
 
Oh, love as long as you can love,   
Oh, love as long as love you may!   
The hour will come, the hour will come:   
By graves lamenting you will stay.          20
 
Then you kneel down before the grave,  
And hide your tearful eyes—alas! 
They see the loved one now no more— 
In long and dewy graveyard grass,   
 
And say: “Look down upon me here         25
Who by your grave am weeping still; 
Forgive that I have given pain:  
Oh God, it was not meant so ill!”   
 
He sees you not and hears you not,  
And seeks not your embrace—ah, no,          30
The lips that kissed you oft, no more  
Say: “I forgave you long ago.”   
 
He did forgive you long ago,  
And hot fell many a tear as toll 
For you and for your bitter word—           35
But hush!—He’s resting at his goal. 
 
Oh, love as long as you can love,   
Oh, love as long as love you may!   
The hour will come, the hour will come:   
By graves lamenting you will stay!          4
 
IS it to me, this sad lamenting strain?   
Are heaven’s choicest gifts bestowed in vain?   
A plenteous fortune, and a beauteous bride,  
Your love rewarded, gratify’d your pride: 
Yet leaving her—’tis me that you pursue           5
Without one single charm, but being new.  
How vile is man! how I detest their ways  
Of artful falsehood, and designing praise!   
Tasteless, an easy happiness you slight,  
Ruin your joy, and mischief your delight,         10
Why should poor pug (the mimic of your kind) 
Wear a rough chain, and be to box confin’d?  
Some cup, perhaps, he breaks, or tears a fan 
While roves unpunish’d the destroyer, man.   
Not bound by vows, and unrestrain’d by shame,           15
In sport you break the heart, and rend the fame.   
Not that your art can be successful here, 
Th’ already plunder’d need no robber fear:   
Nor sighs, nor charms, nor flatteries can move, 
Too well secur’d against a second love.           20
Once, and but once, that devil charm’d my mind; 
To reason deaf, to observation blind;  
I idly hop’d (what cannot love persuade?) 
My fondness equal’d, and my love repaid:  
Slow to distrust, and willing to believe,         25
Long hush’d my doubts, and did myself deceive;  
But oh! too soon—this tale would ever last;  
Sleep, sleep my wrongs, and let me think them past.   
For you, who mourn with counterfeited grief, 
And ask so boldly like a begging thief,           30
May soon some other nymph inflict the pain,  
You know so well with cruel art to feign. 
Though long you sported with Dan Cupid’s dart,  
You may see eyes, and you may feel a heart.  
So the brisk wits, who stop the evening coach,          35
Laugh at the fear which follows their approach; 
With idle mirth, and haughty scorn despise   
The passenger’s pale cheek and staring eyes: 
But seiz’d by Justice, find a fright no jest,   
And all the terror doubled in their breast.          40
 
 
SINCE there’s no help, come let us kiss and part,— 
Nay I have done, you get no more of me;   
And I am glad, yea, glad with all my heart,  
That thus so cleanly I myself can free;   
Shake hands for ever, cancel all our vows,           5
And when we meet at any time again, 
Be it not seen in either of our brows  
That we one jot of former love retain. 
Now at the last gasp of love’s latest breath,   
When his pulse failing, passion speechless lies,           10
When faith is kneeling by his bed of death,  
And innocence is closing up his eyes,  
  —Now if thou would’st, when all have given him over,   
  From death to life thou might’st him yet decover!   
 

SHALL I compare thee to a summer's day?    
Thou art more lovely and more temperate:   
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,    
And summer's lease hath all too short a date;    
  
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,            5
And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;   
And every fair from fair sometime declines,   
By chance, or nature's changing course, untrimm'd.  
  
But thy eternal summer shall not fade,  
Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;   10
Nor shall Death brag thou wanderest in his shade,   
When in eternal lines to time thou growest:—  
  
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see,  
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.    
 



LOVE, flooding all the creeks of my dry soul,   
  From which the warm tide ebbed when I was born,  
Following the moon of destiny, doth roll  
  His slow rich wave along the shore forlorn,   
To make the ocean—God—and me, one whole.          5
 
So, shuddering in its ecstasy, it lies,   
  And, freed from mire and tangle of the ebb,   
Reflects the waxing and the waning skies, 
  And bears upon its panting breast the web  
Of night and her innumerable eyes.         10
 
Nor can conceive at all that it was blind,   
  But trembling with the sharp approach of love,   
That, strenuous, moves without one breath of wind, 
  Gasps, as the wakening maid, on whom the Dove 
With folded wings of deity declined.          15
 
She in the virgin sweetness of her dream  
  Thought nothing strange to find her vision true; 
And I thus bathed in living rapture deem  
  No moveless drought my channel ever knew,  
But rustled always with the murmuring stream.          20
















Look from thy window, and see 
  My passion and my pain!  
I lie on the sands below,          15
  And I faint in thy disdain. 
Let the night-winds touch thy brow  
  With the heat of my burning sigh, 
And melt thee to hear the vow 
  Of a love that shall not die           20
    Till the sun grows cold,  
    And the stars are old, 
    And the leaves of the Judgment  
        Book unfold! 
 
My steps are nightly driven,          25
  By the fever in my breast,  
To hear from thy lattice breathed   
  The word that shall give me rest. 
Open the door of thy heart,   
  And open thy chamber door,          30
And my kisses shall teach thy lips  
  The love that shall fade no more  
    Till the sun grows cold,  
    And the stars are old, 
    And the leaves of the Judgment          35
        Book unfold! 
 


  
TILL I have peace with thee, war other men,  
And when I have peace, can I leave thee then?   
All other wars are scrupulous; only thou  
O free 1 fair city, mayst thyself allow   
To any one. In Flanders, who can tell          5
Whether the master press, or men rebel?   
Only we know, that which most idiots 2 say,  
They must bear blows which come 3 to part the fray.   
France in her lunatic giddiness did hate 4   
Ever our men, yea, and our God, of late;          10
Yet she relies upon our angels well,   
Which ne’er return, no more than they which fell.  
Sick Ireland is with a strange 5 war possest,   
Like to an ague, now raging, now at rest, 
Which time will cure; yet it must do her good           15
If she were purg’d, and her head-vein 6 let blood; 
And Midas joys our Spanish journeys give; 
We touch all gold, 7 but find no food to live;  
And I should be in that hot 8 parching clime 
To dust and ashes turned before my time.          20
To mew me in a ship is to enthral   
Me in a prison that were like to fall; 
Or in a cloister, save that there men dwell  
In a calm heaven, here in a swaying 9 hell.  
Long voyages are long consumptions,         25
And ships are carts for executions; 10 
Yea, they are deaths; is ’t not all one 11 to fly  
Into another world, as ’tis to die? 
Here let me war; in these arms let me lie:   
Here let me parley, batter, bleed, and die. 12          30
Thine arms imprison me, and my arms thee; 
Thy heart thy ransom is; take mine for me.   
Other men war, that they their rest may gain,   
But we will rest that we may fight again. 
Those wars th’ ignorant, these th’ experienced love;          35
There we are always under, here above. 
There 13 engines far off breed a just true fear;   
Near thrusts, pikes, stabs, yea, bullets, hurt not here. 
There lies are wrongs; here safe uprightly lie. 14 
There men kill men; we’ll make one by and by.           40
Thou nothing, I not half so much shall do 15 
In those wars, 16 as they may which from us two 
Shall spring. Thousands we see which travel not 
To war, but stay, swords, arms, and shot  
To make at home; and shall not I do 17 then          45
More glorious service, staying to make men?  

WE are in love’s land to-day; 
    Where shall we go?  
Love, shall we start or stay, 
    Or sail or row?  
There ’s many a wind and way,         5
And never a May but May;   
We are in love’s hand to-day; 
    Where shall we go?  
 
Our landwind is the breath 
Of sorrows kiss’d to death         10
    And joys that were; 
Our ballast is a rose;  
Our way lies where God knows  
    And love knows where.  
    We are in love’s hand to-day—           15
 
Our seamen are fledged Loves, 
Our masts are bills of doves, 
    Our decks fine gold;   
Our ropes are dead maids’ hair,  
Our stores are love-shafts fair          20
    And manifold. 
    We are in love’s land to-day—   
 
Where shall we land you, sweet?  
On fields of strange men’s feet, 
    Or fields near home?           25
Or where the fire-flowers blow,  
Or where the flowers of snow  
    Or flowers of foam? 
    We are in love’s hand to-day—   
 
Land me, she says, where love         30
Shows but one shaft, one dove,   
    One heart, one hand,—  
A shore like that, my dear,   
Lies where no man will steer, 
    No maiden land.          35
 


THAT Love is all there is, 
Is all we know of Love; 
It is enough, the freight should be 
Proportioned to the groove.   


 
FAREWELL, Love, and all thy laws for ever;   
Thy baited hooks shall tangle me no more: 
Senec, and Plato, call me from thy lore,  
To perfect wealth, my wit for to endeavour;  
In blind error when I did persever,         5
Thy sharp repulse, that pricketh aye so sore,   
Taught me in trifles that I set no store; 
But scaped forth thence, since, liberty is lever:  
Therefore, farewell, go trouble younger hearts, 
And in me claim no more authority:          10
With idle youth go use thy property,   
And thereon spend thy many brittle darts: 
  For, hitherto though I have lost my time,  
  Me list no longer rotten boughs to clime.  
 


From the “Lay of the Last Minstrel,” Canto III.
OF him I love day and night, I dream’d I heard he was dead;  
And I dream’d I went where they had buried him I love—but he was not in that place;  
And I dream’d I wander’d, searching among burial-places, to find him;    
And I found that every place was a burial-place;    
The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this house is now;)            5
The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement, the Chicago, Boston, Philadelphia, the Mannahatta, were as full of the dead as of the living,   
And fuller, O vastly fuller, of the dead than of the living;    
—And what I dream’d I will henceforth tell to every person and age,   
And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream’d;  
And now I am willing to disregard burial-places, and dispense with them;     10
And if the memorials of the dead were put up indifferently everywhere, even in the room where I eat or sleep, I should be satisfied;    
And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own corpse, be duly render’d to powder, and pour’d in the sea, I shall be satisfied;   
Or if it be distributed to the winds, I shall be satisfied.  

AND said I that my limbs were old,  
And said I that my blood was cold,  
And that my kindly fire was fled,   
And my poor withered heart was dead,   
  And that I might not sing of love?—          5
How could I, to the dearest theme   
That ever warmed a minstrel’s dream,   
  So foul, so false a recreant prove!  
How could I name love’s very name,  
Nor wake my heart to notes of flame!           10
 
In peace, Love tunes the shepherd’s reed; 
In war, he mounts the warrior’s steed; 
In halls, in gay attire is seen; 
In hamlets, dances on the green. 
Love rules the court, the camp, the grove,           15
And men below, and saints above; 
For love is heaven, and heaven is love.   
 
True love’s the gift which God has given  
To man alone beneath the heaven; 
  It is not fantasy’s hot fire,          20
    Whose wishes, soon as granted, fly;   
  It liveth not in fierce desire,   
    With dead desire it doth not die;  
It is the secret sympathy, 
The silver link, the silken tie,         25
Which heart to heart, and mind to mind,   
In body and in soul can bind.
Meli.  Yet what is love, good shepherd, sain?   
Fau.  It is a sunshine mixed with rain;   
It is a tooth-ache, or like pain;           15
It is a game where none doth gain;  
  The lass saith no, and would full fain; 
  And this is love, as I hear sain. 
 
Meli.  Yet, shepherd, what is love, I pray?  
Fau.  It is a yea, it is a nay,          20
A pretty kind of sporting fray;  
It is a thing will soon away; 
  Then, nymphs, take ’vantage while ye may;  
  And this is love, as I hear say.  
 
Meli.  Yet what is love, good shepherd, show?           25
Fau.  A thing that creeps; it cannot go;  
A prize that passeth to and fro; 
A thing for one, a thing for moe;   
  And he that proves shall find it so; 
  And, shepherd, this is love, I trow.
[S. W. R.] IGNOTO.
        30
 

And hopes, and fears that kindle hope,  
An undistinguishable throng,   
And gentle wishes long subdued,    75
    Subdued and cherish'd long!   
 
She wept with pity and delight,   
She blush'd with love and virgin shame;    
And like the murmur of a dream,   
    I heard her breathe my name.   80
 
Her bosom heaved—she stepp'd aside,  
As conscious of my look she stept—   
Then suddenly, with timorous eye  
    She fled to me and wept.   
 
She half enclosed me with her arms,   85
She press'd me with a meek embrace;  
And bending back her head, look'd up,   
    And gazed upon my face.    
 
'Twas partly love, and partly fear,  
And partly 'twas a bashful art,    90
That I might rather feel, than see.  
    The swelling of her heart.    
 
I calm'd her fears, and she was calm,   
And told her love with virgin pride;    
And so I won my Genevieve,   95
    My bright and beauteous Bride.   


IT was an English ladye bright,  
  The sun shines fair on Carlisle wall,   
And she would marry a Scottish knight, 
  For Love will still be lord of all.  
 
Blithely they saw the rising sun,           5
  When he shone fair on Carlisle wall, 
But they were sad ere day was done, 
  Though Love was still the lord of all.  
 
Her sire gave brooch and jewel fine,   
  Where the sun shines fair on Carlisle wall;           10
Her brother gave but a flask of wine,  
  For ire that Love was lord of all.   
 
For she had lands, both meadow and lea,   
  Where the sun shines fair on Carlisle wall,   
And he swore her death, ere he would see          15
  A Scottish knight the lord of all.   
 
That wine she had not tasted well,  
  The sun shines fair on Carlisle wall,   
When dead in her true love’s arms she fell,  
  For Love was still the lord of all.          20
 
He pierced her brother to the heart,   
  Where the sun shines fair on Carlisle wall:—  
So perish all would true love part, 
  That Love may still be lord of all!  
 
And then he took the cross divine,          25
  Where the sun shines fair on Carlisle wall,   
And died for her sake in Palestine; 
  So Love was still the lord of all.   
 
Now all ye lovers, that faithful prove,   
  The sun shines fair on Carlisle wall,           30
Pray for their souls who died for love,   
  For Love shall still be lord of all!
 
I MET the Love-Talker one eve in the glen,   
He was handsomer than any of our handsome young men,  
His eyes were blacker than the sloe, his voice sweeter far  
Than the crooning of old Kevin’s pipes beyond in Coolnagar. 
 
I was bound for the milking with a heart fair and free—          5
My grief! my grief! that bitter hour drained the life from me; 
I thought him human lover, though his lips on mine were cold,  
And the breath of death blew keen on me within his hold. 
 
I know not what way he came, no shadow fell behind,   
But all the sighing rushes swayed beneath a faery wind           10
The thrush ceased its singing, a mist crept about, 
We two clung together—with the world shut out.  
 
Beyond the ghostly mist I could hear my cattle low,   
The little cow from Ballina, clean as driven snow, 
The dun cow from Kerry, the roan from Inisheer,         15
Oh, pitiful their calling—and his whispers in my ear! 
 
His eyes were a fire; his words were a snare;   
I cried my mother’s name, but no help was there;   
I made the blessed Sign; then he gave a dreary moan,  
A wisp of cloud went floating by, and I stood alone.          20
 
Running ever through my head, is an old-time rune— 
“Who meets the Love-Talker must weave her shroud soon.”  
My mother’s face is furrowed with the salt tears that fall, 
But the kind eyes of my father are the saddest sight of all.   
 
I have spun the fleecy lint, and now my wheel is still,          25
The linen length is woven for my shroud fine and chill,  
I shall stretch me on the bed where a happy maid I lay—  
Pray for the soul of Mairé Og at dawning of the day!  
 

  Yea, here the end  
Of love’s astonishment! Now know we Spirit,  
And Who, for ease of joy, contriveth Spirit. 
Now all life’s loveliness and power we have        110
Dissolved in this one moment, and our burning   
Carries all shining upward, till in us 
Life is not life, but the desire of God,  
Himself desiring and himself accepting.   
Now what was prophecy in us is made       115
Fulfilment: we are the hour and we are the joy, 
We in our marvellousness of single knowledge,   
Of Spirit breaking down the room of fate  
And drawing into his light the greeting fire 
Of God,—God known in ecstasy of love         120
Wedding himself to utterance of himself.
Yet what is Love, good shepherd sain?  
It is a sunshine mixed with rain,   
It is a toothache or like pain,          15
It is a game where none hath gain;  
The lass saith no, yet would full fain:   
And this is Love, as I hear sain. 3 
 
Yet, shepherd, what is Love, I pray?   
It is a yes, it is a nay,          20
A pretty kind of sporting fray,  
It is a thing will soon away. 
Then, nymphs, take vantage while ye may:  
And this is Love, as I hear say. 
 
Yet what is Love, good shepherd, show?         25
A thing that creeps, it cannot go,  
A prize that passeth to and fro, 
A thing for one, a thing for moe,   
And he that proves shall find it so;   
And, shepherd, this is Love, I trow.           30

O hearken the words of his voice of compassion: 
  ‘Come cling round about me, ye faithful who sicken  
Of the weary unrest and the world’s passing fashion!  
  As the rain in mid-morning your troubles shall thicken,           25
  But surely within you some Godhead doth quicken, 
As ye cry to me heeding and leading you home.   
 
‘Come—pain ye shall have, and be blind to the ending! 
  Come—fear ye shall have, mid the sky’s overcasting! 
Come—change ye shall have, for far are ye wending!         30
  Come—no crown ye shall have for your thirst and your fasting,   
  But the kiss’d lips of Love and fair life everlasting! 
Cry out, for one heedeth, who leadeth you home!’   
 
Is he gone? was he with us?—ho ye who seek saving, 
  Go no further; come hither! for have we not found it?          35
Here is the House of Fulfilment of Craving;  
  Here is the Cup with the roses around it;  
  The World’s wound well healed, and the balm that hath bound it: 
Cry out! for he heedeth, fair Love that led home.
Tho’ the bard to purer fame may soar,  
        When wild youth’s past;  
Tho’ he win the wise, who frown’d before, 
        To smile at last;          15
        He’ll never meet   
        A joy so sweet, 
    In all his noon of fame,  
As when first he sung to woman’s ear,  
    His soul-felt flame,           20
And, at every close, she blush’d to hear  
    The one loved name. 
  
BEHOLD, Love, thy power how she despiseth;   
My grievous pain how little she regardeth:   
The solemn oath, whereof she takes no cure,  
Broken she hath, and yet, she bideth sure,   
Right at her ease, and little thee she dreadeth:           5
  Weaponed thou art, and she unarmed sitteth:   
To thee disdainful, all her life she leadeth;   
To me spiteful, without just cause or measure:  
Behold, Love, how proudly she triumpheth. 
  I am in hold, but if thee pity moveth,          10
Go, bend thy bow, that stony hearts breaketh,   
And with some stroke revenge the displeasure 
Of thee, and him that sorrow doth endure, 
And, as his lord, thee lowly here entreateth.   
 

No,—that hallowed form is ne’er forgot 
        Which first love traced; 
Still it lingering haunts the greenest spot          25
        On memory’s waste. 
        ’Twas odour fled   
        As soon as shed;   
    ’Twas morning’s wingèd dream;   
’Twas a light that ne’er can shine again          30
    On life’s dull stream: 
Oh! ’twas light that ne’er can shine again   
    On life’s dull stream.
If my Love knew I could wash and wring,   
If my Love knew I could weave and spin,   
I would make a dress all of the finest kind, 
But the want of money, sure, leaves me behind.          20
 
And still she cried, “I love him the best,   
And a troubled mind, sure, can know no rest,”   
And still she cried, “Bonny boys are few, 
And if my Love leaves me, what will I do?”   
 
I know my Love is an arrant rover,          25
I know he’ll wander the wide world over,  
In dear old Ireland he’ll no longer tarry,   
And an English one he is sure to marry.   
And still she cried, “I love him the best,   
And a troubled mind, sure, can know no rest,”           30
And still she cried, “Bonny boys are few, 
And if my Love leaves me, what will I do?”























There with thy daughter Pleasure they doe play  
Their hurtlesse sports, without rebuke or blame,   
And in her snowy bosome boldly lay  
Their quiet heads, devoyd of guilty shame,           290
After full joyance of their gentle game;  
Then her they crowne their goddesse and their queene, 
And decke with floures thy altars well beseene. 
 
Ay me! deare lord, that ever I might hope,   
For all the paines and woes that I endure,           295
To come at length unto the wished scope   
Of my desire, or might my selfe assure,   
That happie port for ever to recure!   
Then would I thinke these paines no paines at all, 
And all my woes to be but penance small.          300
 
Then would I sing of thine immortall praise  
An heavenly hymne, such as the angels sing,  
And thy triumphant name then would I raise   
Bove all the gods, thee onely honoring,   
My guide, my god, my victor, and my king:         305
Till then, dread lord, vouchsafe to take of me  
This simple song, thus fram’d in praise of thee.
(From The Giaour)

THE COLD in clime are cold in blood,   
  Their love can scarce deserve the name; 
But mine was like the lava flood 
  That boils in Ætna’s breast of flame.   
I cannot prate in puling strain          5
Of ladye-love, and beauty’s chain:  
If changing cheek, and scorching vein, 
Lips taught to writhe, but not complain,  
If bursting heart, and madd’ning brain,   
And daring deed, and vengeful steel,           10
And all that I have felt, and feel, 
Betoken love—that love was mine, 
And shown by many a bitter sign. 
’Tis true, I could not whine nor sigh, 
I knew but to obtain or die.          15
I die—but first I have possess’d,   
And come what may, I have been blest.  
Shall I the doom I sought upbraid?  
No—reft of all, yet undismay’d   
But for the thought of Leila slain,         20
Give me the pleasure with the pain, 
So would I live and love again.  
I grieve, but not, my holy guide!   
For him who dies, but her who died: 
She sleeps beneath the wandering wave—         25
Ah! had she but an earthly grave,   
This breaking heart and throbbing head 
Should seek and share her narrow bed.  
She was a form of life and light,   
That, seen, became a part of sight;         30
And rose, where’er I turn’d mine eye,  
The Morning-star of Memory!   
You grew a matron plump and comely,  
  You dwelt in fashion's brightest blaze;  
My earthly lot was far more homely;   35
  But I too had my festal days.   
No merrier eyes have ever glisten'd  
  Around the hearth-stone's wintry glow,   
Than when my youngest child was christen'd;   
  But that was twenty years ago.   40
 
Time pass'd. My eldest girl was married,   
  And I am now a grandsire gray;  
One pet of four years old I've carried  
  Among the wild-flower'd meads to play.   
In our old fields of childish pleasure,     45
  Where now, as then, the cowslips blow,   
She fills her basket's ample measure;   
  And that is not ten years ago.  
 
But though first love's impassion'd blindness    
  Has pass'd away in colder light,    50
I still have thought of you with kindness,    
  And shall do, till our last good-night.  
The ever-rolling silent hours  
  Will bring a time we shall not know,  
When our young days of gathering flowers    55
  Will be an hundred years ago.

With sence whereof whilest so thy softened spirit  
Is inly toucht, and humbled with meeke zeale,   
Through meditation of his endlesse merit,         255
Lift up thy mind to th’ author of thy weale, 
And to his soveraine mercie doe appeale;  
Learne him to love, that loved thee so deare,   
And in thy brest his blessed image beare. 
 
With all thy hart, with all thy soule and mind,         260
Thou must him love, and his beheasts embrace;   
All other loves, with which the world doth blind   
Weake fancies, and stirre up affections base,   
Thou must renounce, and utterly displace, 
And give thy selfe unto him full and free,           265
That full and freely gave himselfe to thee.  
 
Then shalt thou feele thy spirit so possest, 
And ravisht with devouring great desire   
Of his deare selfe, that shall thy feeble brest 
Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire          270
With burning zeale, through every part entire,  
That in no earthly thing thou shalt delight, 
But in his sweet and amiable sight. 
 
Thenceforth all worlds desire will in thee dye, 
And all earthes glorie, on which men do gaze,           275
Seeme durt and drosse in thy pure sighted eye,  
Compar’d to that celestiall beauties blaze,  
Whose glorious beames all fleshly sense doth daze  
With admiration of their passing light,   
Blinding the eyes and lumining the spright.          280
 
Then shall thy ravisht soule inspired bee 
With heavenly thoughts, farre above humane skil,   
And thy bright radiant eyes shall plainely see  
Th’ idee of his pure glorie present still 
Before thy face, that all thy spirits shall fill           285
With sweete enragement of celestiall love,   
Kindled through sight of those faire things above.
    His Ganymede! His life! His joy!   
Or He comes down to me, or takes me up 
    That I might be His boy,  
And fill, and taste, and give, and drink the cup,  
    But those (tho’ great) are all         35
      Too short and small, 
Too weak and feeble pictures to express   
The true mysterious depths of Blessedness.   
  I am His image, and His friend,   
  His son, bride, glory, temple, end.         40
“Good Mussulman, abstain from pork. 
There is a part in every swine   
No friend or follower of mine 
May taste, whate’er his inclination,           5
On pain of excommunication.”  
Such Mohammed’s mysterious charge,  
And thus he left the point at large.   
Had he the sinful part expressed,   
They might with safety eat the rest;           10
But for one piece they thought it hard 
From the whole hog to be debarred,  
And set their wit at work to find   
What joint the Prophet had in mind. 
Much controversy straight arose—         15
These chose the back, the belly those; 
By some, ’tis confidently said,  
He meant not to forbid the head; 
While others at that doctrine rail, 
And piously prefer the tail.          20
Thus, conscience freed from every clog,   
Mohammedans eat up the hog.   
  You laugh—’tis well. The tale applied   
May make you laugh on t’other side. 
Renounce the world! the preacher cries.           25
We do! a multitude replies.   
While one as innocent regards 
A snug and friendly game at cards;  
And one, whatever you may say,   
Can see no evil in a play;         30
Some love a concert, or a race;  
And others shooting, and the chase. 
Reviled and loved, renounced and followed,   
Thus, bit by bit, the world is swallowed; 
Each thinks his neighbour makes too free,         35
Yet likes a slice as well as he. 
With sophistry their sauce they sweeten,  
Till quite from tail to snout ’tis eaten.















What lurks in the deep gaze   
Of the old wolf? Amaze, 
Hope, recognition, gladness, anger, fear.       105
But deeper than all these  
Love muses, yearns, and sees, 
And is the self that does not change nor veer.  
 LOVE bade me welcome: yet my soul drew back,    
                Guiltie of dust and sinne.    
But quick-ey'd Love, observing me grow slack  
                From my first entrance in,    
Drew nearer to me, sweetly questioning,            5
                If I lack'd any thing.  
  
A guest, I answer'd, worthy to be here:    
                Love said, you shall be he.   
I the unkinde, ungratefull? Ah my deare,   
                I cannot look on thee.   10
Love took my hand, and smiling did reply,  
                Who made the eyes but I?   
  
Truth Lord, but I have marr'd them: let my shame    
                Go where it doth deserve.  
And know you not, sayes Love, who bore the blame?    15
                My deare, then I will serve.  
You must sit down, sayes Love, and taste my meat:   
                So I did sit and eat.   
 

Not love of self alone, 
Struggle for lair and bone,         110
But self-denying love of mate and young,  
Love that is kind and wise,   
Knows trust and sacrifice, 
And croons the old dark universal tongue.…   
  
ALONE upon the housetops to the North  
I turn and watch the lightning in the sky—   
The glamour of thy footsteps in the North.   
Come back to me, Beloved, or I die. 
 
Below my feet the still bazar is laid—         5
Far, far below the weary camels lie—   
The camels and the captives of thy raid.  
Come back to me, Beloved, or I die! 
 
My father’s wife is old and harsh with years 
And drudge of all my father’s house am I—         10
My bread is sorrow and my drink is tears. 
Come back to me, Beloved, or I die! 
 
And who has understood        115
Our brothers of the wood,  
Save he who puts off guile and every guise   
Of violence,—made truce 
With panther, bear, and moose,   
As beings like ourselves whom love makes wise?        120
 
For they, too, do love’s will,   
Our lesser clansmen still; 
The House of Many Mansions holds us all;  
Courageous, glad and hale, 
They go forth on the trail,         125
Hearing the message, hearkening to the call.…   
 
Open the door to-night  
Within your heart, and light  
The lantern of love there to shine afar.  
On a tumultuous sea        130
Some straining craft, maybe,  
With bearings lost, shall sight love’s silver star.   
WHEN the lamp is shatter'd  
The light in the dust lies dead—  
When the cloud is scatter'd,   
The rainbow's glory is shed.   
When the lute is broken,            5
Sweet tones are remember'd not;   
When the lips have spoken,  
Lov'd accents are soon forgot.    
  
As music and splendour   
Survive not the lamp and the lute,    10
The heart's echoes render   
No song when the spirit is mute—  
No song but sad dirges,  
Like the wind through a ruin'd cell,    
Or the mournful surges    15
That ring the dead seaman's knell.   
  
When hearts have once mingl'd,    
Love first leaves the well-built nest;  
The weak one is singl'd  
To endure what it once possesst.   20
O Love! who bewailest    
The frailty of all things here,   
Why choose you the frailest    
For your cradle, your home, and your bier?    
  
Its passions will rock thee     25
As the storms rock the ravens on high;  
Bright reason will mock thee   
Like the sun from a wintry sky.   
From thy nest every rafter  
Will rot, and thine eagle home     30
Leave thee naked to laughter,  
When leaves fall and cold winds come.   
 

ALL June I bound the rose in sheaves.  
Now, rose by rose, I strip the leaves  
And strow them where Pauline may pass. 
She will not turn aside? Alas!   
Let them lie. Suppose they die?          5
The chance was they might take her eye.   
 
How many a month I strove to suit   
These stubborn fingers to the lute! 
To-day I venture all I know.  
She will not hear my music? So!          10
Break the string; fold music’s wing:   
Suppose Pauline had bade me sing!   
 
My whole life long I learn’d to love.  
This hour my utmost art I prove  
And speak my passion—heaven or hell?           15
She will not give me heaven? ’T is well!  
Lose who may—I still can say, 
Those who win heaven, bless’d are they!   
I WILL row my boat on Muckross Lake when the grey of the dove  
Comes down at the end of the day; and a quiet like prayer   
Grows soft in your eyes, and among your fluttering hair  
The red of the sun is mixed with the red of your cheek.  
I will row you, O boat of my heart! till our mouths have forgotten to speak           5
In the silence of love, broken only by trout that spring 
And are gone, like a fairy’s finger that casts a ring 
With the luck of the world for the hand that can hold it fast. 
I will rest on my oars, my eyes on your eyes, till our thoughts have passed   
From the lake and the sky and the rings of the jumping fish;           10
Till our ears are filled from the reeds with a sudden swish,   
And a sound like the beating of flails in the time of corn. 
We shall hold our breath while a wonderful thing is born 
From the songs that were chanted by bards in the days gone by; 
For a wild white swan shall be leaving the lake for the sky,           15
With the curve of her neck stretched out in a silver spear. 
Oh! then when the creak of her wings shall have brought her near, 
We shall hear again a swish, and a beating of flails, 
And a creaking of oars, and a sound like the wind in sails, 
As the mate of her heart shall follow her into the air.          20
O wings of my soul! we shall think of Angus and Caer, 
And Etain and Midir, that were changed into wild white swans   
To fly round the ring of the heavens, through the dusks and the dawns,  
Unseen by all but true lovers, till judgment day,  
Because they had loved for love only. O love! I will say,           25
For a woman and man with eternity ringing them round, 
And the heavens above and below them, a poor thing it is to be bound 
To four low walls that will spill like a pedlar’s pack,  
And a quilt that will run into holes, and a churn that will dry and crack. 
Oh! better than these, a dream in the night, or our heart’s mute prayer         30
That O’Donoghue, the enchanted man, should pass between water and air,  
And say, I will change them each to a wild white swan,   
Like the lovers Angus and Midir, and their loved ones, Caer and Etain,  
Because they have loved for love only, and have searched through the shadows of things 
For the Heart of all hearts, through the fire of love, and the wine of love, and the wings.  
Then shalt thou feele thy spirit so possest  
And ravisht with devouring great desire   
Of His dear selfe, that shall thy feeble brest  
Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire          270
With burning zeale, through every part entire,  
That in no earthly thing thou shalt delight, 
But in His sweet and amiable sight. 
 
Thenceforth all world’s desire will in thee dye;   
And all earthe’s glorie, on which men do gaze,          275
Seeme durt and drosse in thy pure-sighted eye,  
Compar’d to that celestiall beautie’s blaze, 
Whose glorious beames all fleshly sense doth daze  
With admiration of their passing light,   
Blinding the eyes, and lumining the spright.         280
 
Then shall thy ravisht soul inspired bee  
With heavenly thoughts, farre above humane skil,   
And thy bright radiant eyes shall plainely see  
Th’ idee of His pure glorie present still 
Before thy face, that all thy spirits shall fill           285
With sweete enragement of celestiall love,   
Kindled through sight of those faire things above.
‘Till I turn from Female love 
And root up the Infernal Grove,  
I shall never worthy be        55
To step into Eternity.  
 
‘And, to end thy cruel mocks, 
Annihilate thee on the rocks, 
And another form create 
To be subservient to my fate.        60
 
‘Let us agree to give up love,   
And root up the Infernal Grove;  
Then shall we return and see  
The worlds of happy Eternity. 
 
‘And throughout all Eternity         65
I forgive you, you forgive me.   
As our dear Redeemer said: 
“This the Wine, and this the Bread.”’  

ELYSIUM is as far as to 
The very nearest room,  
If in that room a friend await   
Felicity or doom. 
  
What fortitude the soul contains,           5
That it can so endure   
The accent of a coming foot,  
The opening of a door!  
ALTER? When the hills do.  
Falter? When the sun 
Question if his glory   
Be the perfect one.  
Surfeit? When the daffodil         5
Doth of the dew:  
Even as herself, O friend! 
I will of you! 

YOU left me, sweet, two legacies,—  
A legacy of love  
A Heavenly Father would content, 
Had He the offer of; 
  
You left me boundaries of pain           5
Capacious as the sea,   
Between eternity and time, 
Your consciousness and me. 


MINE by the right of the white election!  
Mine by the royal seal! 
Mine by the sign in the scarlet prison 
Bars cannot conceal! 
  
Mine, here in vision and in veto!           5
Mine, by the grave’s repeal   
Titled, confirmed,—delirious charter!  
Mine, while the ages steal!


And all the margent round about was sett
With shady Laurell trees, thence to defend
The sunny beames which on the billowes bett,
And those which therein bathed mote offend.
As Guyon hapned by the same to wend,
Two naked Damzelles he therein espyde,
Which therein bathing seemed to contend
And wrestle wantonly, ne car'd to hyde
Their dainty partes from vew of any which
them eyd.
Sometimes the one would lift the other quight
Above the waters, and then downe againe
Her plong, as over-maystered by might,
Where both awhile would covered remaine,
And each the other from to rise restraine;
The whiles their snowy limbes, as through a vele,
So through the christall waves appeared plaine:
Then suddeinly both would themselves unhele,
And th' amarous sweet spoiles to greedy eyes
revele.
The wanton Maidens, him espying, stood
Gazing awhile at his unwonted guise;
Then th' one her selfe low ducked in the flood,
Abasht that her a straunger did avise;
But thother rather higher did arise,
And her two lilly paps aloft displayed,
[13]
And all that might his melting hart entyse
To her delights she unto him bewrayd ;
The rest hidd underneath him more desirous
made.
With that the other likewise up arose,
And her faire lockes, which formerly were bownd
Up in one knott, she low adowne did lose,
Which flowing low and thick her cloth'd arownd,
And th' yvorie in golden mantle gownd :
So that faire spectacle from him was reft,
Yet that which reft it no lesse faire was fownd.
So hidd in lockes and waves from lookers theft,
Nought but her lovely face she for his looking
left.
Withall she laughed, and she blusht withall,
That blushing to her laughter gave more grace,
And laughter to her blushing, as did fall.
Now when they spyde the knight to slacke his
pace
Them to behold, and in his sparkling face
The secret signes of kindled lust appeare,
Their wanton meriments they did encreace,
And to him beckned to approch more neare,
And shewd him many sights that corage cold
could ream
EDMUND SPENSEB
(From The Faerie Queene)
[14]
VENUS AND ADONIS
"Sweet boy," she, says, "this night I'll waste in
sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch.
Tell me, Love's master, shall we meet to-morrow?
Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the
match?"
He tells her, no; to-morrow he intends
To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.
"The boar!" quoth she; whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek ; she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoking arms she throws :
She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,
He on her belly falls, she on her back.
Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter :
All is imaginary she doth prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her ;
That worse than Tantalus' is her annoy,
To clip Elysium, and to lack her joy.
Even as poor birds, deceiv'd with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw,
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps
[15]
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw.
The warm effects which she in him finds
missing
She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.
But all is vain ; good queen, it will not be :
She hath assay'd as much as may be prov'd;
Her pleading hath deserv'd a greater fee;
She's Love, she loves, and yet she is not lov'd.
"Fie, fie," he says, "you crush me ; let me go ;
You have no reason to withhold me so."
With this, he breaketh from the sweet embrace
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark laund runs
apace ;
Leaves Love upon her back deeply distress'd.
Look, how a bright star shooteth from the sky,
So glides he in the night from Venus' eye
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
[16]
"And homeward through the dark laund runs apace"
TO HIS MISTRESS GOING TO BED
Come, madam, come, all rest my powers defy ;
Until I labour, I in labour lie.
The. foe ofttimes, having the foe in sight,
Is tired with standing, though he never fight.
Off with that girdle, like heaven's zone glittering,
But a far fairer world encompassing.
Unpin that spangled breast-plate, which you
wear,
That th' eyes of busy fools may be stopped there.
Unlace yourself, for that harmonious chime
Tells me from you that now it is bed-time.
Off with that happy busk, which I envy,
That still can be, and still can stand so nigh.
Your gown going off such beauteous state reveals,
As when from flowery meads th' hill's shadow
steals.
Off with your wiry coronet, and show
The hairy diadems which on you do grow.
Off with your hose and shoes; then softly tread
In this love's hallow'd temple, this soft bed.
In such white robes heaven's angels used to be
Revealed to men ; thou, angel, bring'st with thee
A heaven-like Mahomet's paradise; and though
111 spirits walk in white, we easily know
By this these angels from an evil sprite;
Those set our hairs, but these our flesh upright.
[18]
". . . thou, angel, bring'st with thee
A heaven like Mahomet's paradise, . .
License my roving hands, and let them go
Before, behind, between, above, below.
Oh, my America, my Newfoundland,
My kingdom, safest when with one man mann'd,
My mine of precious stones, my empery ;
How am I blest in thus discovering thee!
To enter in these bonds, is to be free;
Then, where my hand is set, my soul shall be.
Full nakedness! All joys are due to thee;
As souls unbodied, bodies unclothed must be
To taste whole joys. Gems which you women use
Are like Atlanta's ball cast in men's views;
That, when a fool's eye lighteth on a gem,
His earthly soul might court that, not them.
Like pictures, or like books' gay coverings made
For laymen, are all women thus array'd.
Themselves are only mystic books, which we
—Whom their imputed grace will dignify—
Must see reveal'd. Then, since that I may know,
As liberally as to thy midwife show
Thyself; cast all, yea, this white linen hence;
There is no penance due to innocence:
To teach thee, I am naked first; why then,
What needst thou have more covering than a
man?
JOHN DONNE
[20]
V
o
FROM "A RAPTURE"
Then, as the empty Bee, that lately bore
Into the common treasure all her store,
Flies 'bout the painted field with nimble wing,
Deflow'ring the fresh virgins of the Spring—
So will I rifle all the sweets that dwell
In thy delicious Paradise, and swell
My bag with honey, drawn forth by the power
Of fervent kisses from each spicy flower.
I'll seize the Rose-buds in their perfumed bed,
The violet knots, like curious mazes spread
O'er all the garden; taste the ripened cherries,
The warm firm apple, tipp'd with coral berries.
Then will I visit with a wand'ring kiss
The Vale of lilies, and the Bower of bliss;
And where the beauteous region doth divide
Into two milky ways, my lip shall slide
Down those smooth alleys, wearing as they go
A track for lovers on the printed snow;
Thence climbing o'er the swelling Apennine,
Retire into the grove of Eglantine:
Where I will all those ravished sweets distil
Through Love's alembic, and with chymic skill
From the mixed mass one sovereign balm
derive,
Then bring the great Elixir to thy hive.
[21]
Now in more subtle wreaths I will entwine
My sinewy limbs, my arms and legs, with thine.
Thou like a sea of milk shalt lie display'd
Whilst I the smooth calm ocean will invade,
With such a tempest, as when Jove of old
Fell down on Danae in a stream of gold ;
Yet my tall pinnace shall in th' Cyprian strait
Ride safe at anchor, and unload her freight:
My rudder with thy bold hand, like a tried
And skilful pilot, thou shalt steer, and guide
My Bark into Love's channel, where it shall
Dance, as the bounding waves do rise or fall.
THOMAS CAREW
[22]
"Then, as the empty Bee, ..."
TO DIANEME
Shew me thy feet; shew me thy legs, thy thighes ;
Shew me Those Fleshie Principalities;
Shew me that Hill (where smiling Love doth sit)
Having a living Fountain under it.
Shew me thy waste; then let me there withall,
By the Assention of thy Lawn, see All.
ROBERT HERRICK
[24]
"Shew me thy feet ;
\
THE POET LOVES A MISTRESSE,
BUT NOT TO MARRY
I do not love to wed,
Though I do like to wooe;
And for a maidenhead
He beg, and buy it too.
He praise, and He approve
Those maids that never vary;
And fervently He love;
But yet I would not marry.
He hug, He kisse, He play,
And Oock-like Hens He tread:
And sport it any way;
But in the Bridall Bed:
For why? that man is poore,
Who hath but one of many;
But crown'd he is with store,
That single may have any.
Why then, say, what is he
(To freedome so unknown)
Who having two or three,
Will be content with one?
ROBERT HERRICK
[26]
"I do not love to wed"
UPON JULIA'S WASHING HERSELF
IN THE RIVER
How fierce was I, when I did see
My Julia wash her self in thee!
So Litties thorough Cristall look:
So purest pebbles in the brook :
As in the River Julia did,
Halfe with a Lawne of water hid.
Into thy streames my self I threw,
And struggling there, I kist thee too;
And more had done (it is confest)
Had not thy waves forbad the rest.
ROBERT HERRICK
[28]

LOVE'S COMPLEMENT
0 My Dearest, I shall grieve thee,
When I swear (yet, Sweet, believe me:)
By thine eyes, the tempting book
On which even crabbed old men look,—
I swear to thee, though none abhor them,
Yet I do not love thee for them.
1 do not love thee for that fair
Rich fan of thy most curious hair;
Though the wires thereof be drawn
Finer than the threads of lawn,
And are softer than the leaves
On which the subtle spinner weaves.
I do not love thee for those flowers
Growing on thy cheeks—Love's bowers;
Though such cunning hath them spread,
None can part their white and red ;
Love's golden arrows thence are shot:
Yet for them I love thee not
I do not love thee for those soft ' '
Red coral lips I've kiss'd so oft;
Nor teeth of pearl, the double guard
To speech, whence music still is heard :
Though from those lips a kiss being taken
Would Tyrants melt, and Death awaken.
[30]
"I do not love thee for that fair
Rich fan of thy most curious hair;
I do not love thee, O my fairest !
For that richest—for that rarest
Silver pillar which stands under
Thy round head, that globe of wonder :
Though that neck be whiter far
Than towers of polish'd ivory are.
I do not love thee for those mountains
Hill'd with snow; whence milky fountains
(Sugar'd sweets, as sirup'd berries,)
Must one day run, through pipes of cherries:
O how much those breasts do move me !
Yet for them I do not love thee.
I do not love thee for that belly,
Sleek as satin, soft as jelly;
Though within that crystal Mound
•Heaps of treasure may be found,
So rich, that for the least of them
A king might leave his diadem.
I do not love thee for those thighs,
Whose alabaster rocks do rise
So high and even, that they stand
Like sea-marks to some happy land :
Happy they, whose eyes have seen them,
But happier he that sails between them.
[32]
I love thee not for thy moist palm,
Though the dew thereof be balm ;
Nor for thy pretty leg and foot,
Although it be the precious root
On which this goodly cedar grows :
Sweet, I love thee not for thosa
Nor for thy wit, though pure and quick,
Whose substance no arithmetic
Can number down ; nor for the charms
Thou makest with thy embracing arms:
Though in them one night to lie,
Dearest, I would gladly die.
I love not for those eyes, nor hair,
Nor cheeks, nor lips, nor teeth so rare,
Nor for thy speech, thy neck, nor breast,
Nor for thy belly, nor the rest;
Nor for thy hand nor foot so small:
But, woulds't thou know, dear sweet?—
for all !
THOMAS CARBW
[33]
SO SPAKE OUR GENERAL MOTHER
So spake our general mother, and, with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreproved,
And meek surrender, half-imbracing leaned
On our first father; half her swelling breast
Naked met his, under the flowing gold
Of her loose tresses hid. He, in delight
Both of her beauty and submissive charms,
Smiled with superior love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles when he impregns the clouds
That shed May flowers, and pressed her matron
lip
With kisses pure. Aside the Devil turned
For envy ; yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus
plained : —
"Sight hateful, sight tormenting ! Thus these
two,
Imparadised in one another's arms,
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss ; while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfilled, with pain of longing pines!"
JOHN MILTON
(From Paradise Lost)
[34]
"... Thus these two
Imparadised in one another's arms,"
ADAM AND EVE
So saying she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept, much won that he his love
Had so ennobled as of choice to incur
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death.
In recompense (for such compliance bad
Such recompense best merits), from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit
With liberal hand. He scrupled not to eat,
Against his better knowledge, not deceived,
But fondly overcome with female charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan ;
Sky loured, and, muttering thunder, some sad
drops
Wept at completing of the mortal Sin
Original ; while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill, nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to soothe
Him with her loved society; that now,
As with new wine intoxicated both,
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity within them breeding wings
Wherewith to scorn the Earth. But that false
Fruit
Far other operation first displayed,
Carnal desire inflaming. He on Eve
Began to cast lascivious eyes ; she him
As wantonly repaid ; in lust they burn,
Till Adam thus 'gan Eve to dalliance move :—
"Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste
And elegant—of sapience no small part;
[36]
"... But that false Fruit
Far other operation first displayed,"
Since to each meaning savour we apply,
And palate call judicious. I the praise
Yield thee; so well this day thou hast purveyed.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting. If such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished
For this one Tree had been forbidden ten.
But come; so well refreshed, now let us play,
As meet is, after such delicious fare;
For never did thy beauty, since the day
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so enftame my sense
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now
Than ever—bounty of this virtuous Tree!"
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amourous intent, well understood
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire.
Her hand he seized, and to a shady bank
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowered,
He led her, nothing loth ; flowers were the couch,
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel,
And hyacinth—Earth's freshest, softest lap.
There they their fill of love and love's disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal,
The solace of their sin, till dewy sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play.
JOHN MILTON
(From Paradise Lost)
[38]
A SONG OF DALLIANCE
Heark, my Flora! Love doth call us
To that strife that must befal us.
He has rob'd his mother's Myrtles
And hath pull'd her downy Turtles.
See, our genial hosts are crown'd,
And our beds like billows rise;
Softer combat's nowhere found,
And who loses, wins the prize.
Let not dark nor shadows fright thee;
Thy limbs of lustre they will light thee.
Fear not any can surprise us,
Love himself doth now disguise us.
From thy waste thy girdle throw:
Night and darkness both dwell here:
Words or actions who can know,
Where there's neither eye nor ear?
Shew thy bosom and then hide it;
License touching, and then chide it ;
Give a grant and then forbear it,
Offer something, and forswear it;
Ask where all our shame is gone;
Call us wicked wanton men;
Do as turtles, kiss and groan ;
Say "We ne'er shall meet again."
[39]
I can hear thee curse, yet chase thee;
Drink thy tears, yet still embrace thee;
Easie riches is no treasure;
She that's willing spoils the pleasure.
Love bids learn the wrestlers' fight;
Pull and struggle whilst ye twine;
Let me use my force tonight,
The next conquest shall be thine.
WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT
[40]
"Heark, any Flora! Love doth call
NO PLATONIQUE LOVE
Tell me no more of minds embracing minds,
And hearts exchang'd for hearts;
That Spirits Spirits meet, as Winds do Winds,
And mix their subt'lest parts ;
That two unbodi'd Essences may kiss,
And then like Angels, twist and feel one Bliss.
I was that silly thing that once was wrought
To practice this thin Love;
I climb'd from Sex to Soul, from Soul to Thought;
But thinking there to move,
Headlong, I rowl'd from Thought to Soul, and
then
From Soul I lighted at the Sex agen.
As some strict down-look'd men pretend to fast
Who yet in Closets Eat;
So Lovers who profess they Spirits taste,
Feed yet on grosser meat;
I know they boast they Soules to Soules Convey,
How e'r they meet, the Body is the Way.
Come, I will undeceive thee, they that tread
Those vain Aeriall waies,
Are like young Heyrs, and Alchymists misled
To waste their wealth and Daies,
For searching thus to be for ever Rich,
They only find a Med'cine for the Itch.
WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT
[42]
"That Spirits Spirits meet, as Winds do Winds1
WOMEN
Give me a Girle (if one I needs must meet)
Or in her Nuptiall, or her winding sheet ;
I know but two good Houres that women have,
One in the Bed, another in the Grave.
Thus of the whole Sex all I would desire,
Is to enjoy their Ashes, or their Fire.
WILLIAM CAETWRIGHT
[44]
"Is to enjoy their Ashes, or their Fire"
"JOYS UNSPEAKABLE"
Then like some wealthy Island thou shalt ly ;
And like the Sea about it, /;
Thou like fair Albion, to the Sailors Sight,
Spreading her beauteous Bosom all in White:
Like the kind Ocean I will be,
With loving Arms for ever clasping Thee.
But I'll embrace Thee gentli'er far than so;
As their fresh Banks soft Rivers do,
Nor shall the proudest Planet boast a power
Of making my full Love to ebb one hour;
It never dry or low can prove,
Whilst thy unwasted Fountain feeds my Love.
Such Heat and Vigour shall our Kisses bear,
As if like Doves we' engendred there.
No bound nor rule my pleasures shall endure,
In Love there's none too much an Epicure.
Nought shall my hands or Lips controul ;
I'll kiss Thee through, I'll kiss thy very Soul.
Yet nothing, but the Night our sports shall know ;
Night that's both blvnd and silent too.
Alphaeus found not a more secret trace,
His lov'd Sicanian Fountain to embrace,
Creeping so far beneath the Sea,
Than I will do t' enjoy, and feast on Thee.
[46]
"Then like some wealthy Island thou shalt ly ;"
Men, out of Wisdom; Women, out of Pride,
The pleasant Thefts of Love do hide.
That may secure thee ; but thou hast yet from Me
A more infallible Securitie.
For there's no danger I should tell
The Joys, which are to Me unspeakable.
ABRAHAM COWLEY
[48]
THE DESPAIRING SHEPHERD
Alexis shun'd his Fellow Swains,
Their rural Sports, and jocund Strains:
(Heav'n guard us all from Oupid's Bow!)
He lost his Crook, He left his flocks ;
And wand'ring thro' the lonely Rocks,
He nourish'd endless Woe.
The Nymphs and Shepherds round Him came:
His Grief Some pity, Others blame :
The fatal Cause All kindly seek.
He mingled his Concern with Their's :
He gave 'em back their friendly Tears :
He sigh'd but would not speak.
Clorinda came among the rest :
And She too kind Concern exprest,
And ask'd the Reason of his Woe :
She ask'd, but with an Air and Mein,
That made it easily foreseen,
She fear'd too much to know.
The Shepherd rais'd his mournful Head:
And will You pardon Me, He said,
While I the cruel Truth reveal?
Which nothing from my Breast should tear;
Which never should offend Your Ear;
But that You bid Me tell.
[49]
"lis thus I rove, 'tis thus complain;
Since You appear'd upon the Plain :
You are the Cause of all my Care:
Your Eyes ten thousand Dangers dart:
Ten thousand Torments vex My Heart:
I love, and I despair.
Too much, Alexis, I have heard :
'Tis what I thought; 'tis what I fear'd:
And yet I pardon You, She cry'd :
But you shall promise ne'er again
To breath your Vows, or speak your Pain:
He bow'd, obey'd, and dy'd.
MATTHEW PRIOB
[50]
"Alexis shun'd his Fellow Swains,"
SONG
Nanny blushes when I woo her,
And, with kindly-chiding eyes,
Faintly says, I shall undo her,
Faintly, O forbear! she cries.
But her breasts, while I am pressing,
While to her's my lips I join,
Warm'd she seems to taste the blessing,
And her kisses answer mine.
Undebauch'd by rules of honour,
Innocence with nature charms;
One bids, gently push me from her,
T'other, take me in her arms.
MATTHEW PRIOR
[52]
"Nanny blushes when I woo her,"
SONNET
Alice is tall and upright as a Pine,
White as blaunch'd Almonds or the falling Snow,
Sweet as are Damask Roses when they blow,
And doubtless fruitful as the swelling vine.
Ripe to be cut, and ready to be press'd,
Her full cheek'd beauties very well appear,
And a year's fruit she loses ev'ry year
Wanting a man t' improve her to the best
Full fain she would be husbanded, and yet,
Alas ! she cannot a fit Lab'rer get
To cultivate her to her own content:
Fain would she be (God wot) about her task,
And yet (forsooth) she is too proud to ask,
And (which is worse) too modest to consent
CHARLES COTTON
[54]
Her full cheek'd beauties very well appear,"
OOLIN'S KISSES
Come, my fairest, learn of me,
Learn to give and take the bliss;
Oome, my love, here's none but we,
I'll instruct thee how to kiss.
Why turn from me that dear face?
Why that blush, and down-cast eye?
Come, come, meet my fond embrace,
And the mutual rapture try.
Throw thy lovely, twining arms
Round my neck, or round my waist ;
And whilst I devour thy charms,
Let me closely be embrac'd :
Then when soft ideas rise,
And the gay desires grow strong,
Let them sparkle in thy eyes,
Let them murmur from thy tongue.
To my breast with rapture cling,
Look with transport on my face,
Kiss me, press me, everything
To endear the fond embrace.
Every tender name of love
In soft whispers let me hear ;
And let speaking nature prove
Every extasy sincere.
EOBEET DODSLEY
[56]
"I'll instruct thee how to kiss,"
THE PROGRESS OF LOVE
Beneath the myrtle's secret shade,
When Delia blest my eyes;
At first I view'd the lovely maid
In silent soft surprise.
With trembling voice and anxious mind
I softly whisper'd love;
She blush'd a smile so sweetly kind,
Did all my fears remove.
Her lovely yielding form I prest,
Sweet maddening kisses stole;
And soon her swimming eyes confest
The wishes of her soul :
In wild tumultuous bliss, I cry,
"O Delia, now be kind !"
She press'd me close, and with a sigh,
To melting joys resign'd.
ROBERT DODSLEY
[58]
"Beneath the myrtle's secret shade,"
LOVE AND SLEEP
Lying asleep between the strokes of night
I saw my love lean over my sad bed,
Pale as the duskiest lily's leaf or head,
Smooth-skinned and dark, with bare throat made
to bite,
Too wan for blushing and too warm for white,
But perfect-coloured without white or red.
And her lips opened amorously, and said—
I wist not what, saving one word—Delight.
And all her face was honey to my mouth,
And all her body pasture to mine eyes;
The long lithe arms and hotter hands than fire,
The quivering flanks, hair smelling of the south,
The bright light feet, the splendid supple
thighs
And glittering eyelids of my soul's desire.
ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE
[60]
"And glittering eyelids of my soul's desire."
HYPSIPYLE
In the hot dust, where lizards crouch
And pant, he made her bridal couch ;
Thither down drew her to his side
And, phantom, taught her to be bride
With words so ardent, looks so hot
She needs must feel what she had not,
Guess herself in beleaguered bed
And throb response. Thus she was wed.
As she whom £eus loved in a cloud,
So lay she in her lover's shroud,
And o'er her members crept the chill
We know when mist creeps up a hill
Out of the vale at eve. As grows
The ivy, rooting as it goes,
In such a quick close envelope
She lay aswoon, nor guessed the scope
Nor tether of his hot intent,
Nor what to that inert she lent,
Save when at last with half-turned head
And glimmering eyes, encompassed
She saw herself, a bride possest
By ghostly bridegroom, held and prest
To unfelt bosom, saw his mouth
Against her own, which to his drouth
Gave no allay that she could sense,
Nor took of her sweet recompense.
So moved by pity, stirred by rue,
[62]
So moved by pity, stirred by rue,"
Out of their onslaught young love grew.
Love that with delicate tongues of fire
Can kindle hearts inflamed desire
In her for him who needed it;
And so she claimed and by eyes' wit
Had what she would: and now made war,
Being, as all sweet women are,
Prudes till Love calls them, and then fierce
In love's high calling. Thus with her ears
She fed on love, and to her eyes
Lent deeds of passionate emprise—
Till at the last, the shadowy strife
Ended, she owned herself all wife.
MAUHICE HEWLETT
[64]
DELILAH
In the midnight of darkness and terror
When I would grope nearer to God,
With my back to a record of error
And the highway of sin I have trod,
There come to me shapes I would banish—
The shapes of the deeds I have done ;
And I pray and I plead till they vanish—
All vanish and leave me, save one.
That one, with a smile like the splendor
Of the sun in the middle-day skies—
That one, with a spell that is tender—
That one with a dream in her eyes—
Cometh close, in her rare Southern beauty,
Her languor, her indolent grace;
And my soul turns its back on its duty,
To live in the light of her face.
She touches my cheek, and I quiver—
I tremble with exquisite pains;
She sighs—like an overcharged river
My blood rushes on through my veins;
She smiles—and in mad-tiger fashion
As a she-tiger fondles her own
I clasp her with fierceness and passion
And kiss her with shudder and groan.
[65]
Once more, in our love's sweet beginnings,
I put away God and the World ;
Once more, in the joys of our sinnings,
Are the hopes of eternity hurled.
There is nothing my soul lacks or misses
As I clasp the dream-shape to my breast;
In the passion and pain of her kisses
Life blooms to its richest and best.
O ghost of dead sin unrelenting,
Go back to the dust, and the sod !
Too dear and too sweet for repenting,
Ye stand between me and my God.
If I, by the Throne, should behold you,
Smiling up with those eyes loved so well,
Close, close in my arms I would fold you,
And drop with you down to sweet Hell.
ELLA WHEELER WILCOX
[66]
"There come to me shapes I would banish—"
COMMUNISM
On nights like this, when my blood runs riot
With the fever of youth and its mad desires,
When my brain in vain bids my heart be quiet,
When my breast seems the center of lava-fires,
Oh, then is the time when most I miss you,
And I swear by the stars and my soul and say
That I will have you, and hold you, and kiss you,
Though the whole world stands in the way.
ELLA WHEELER WILCOX
[68]
"When my breast seems the center of lava-fires,"
IRENE
I was a singer in the days when Pan
Leapt through the roses in the month of June,
And shook the petals down upon the noon ;
And through the quashy bracken-glades I ran,
Dreaming no word of how the world began,
Nor grieving in the graveyards of the moon
Where pedants lie—I had a pipe, a tune,
And the first pagan ecstasy of man.
There passed me in the pleasant forest-light
Fair forms of lovers trembling into rose
That was not of the sun, and no man knows
With what delirious tumult of delight
Their voices filled the branches, and the sight
Of their fine rapture conquered all my woes,
As I had bathed in that black stream that flows
Across the passionless paradise of night.
It seemed that life was but a game to dare,
The forfeit only death, and wandering
Across the piney hills they heard me fling
A heart of hopeful music on the air,
And there were roses, roses everywhere,
And birds of tuneful voice and shining wing
To carry love to God, the lips of spring
Had made the mouth of summer very fair.
[70]
"I was a singer in the days when Pan"
Love played with us beneath the laughing trees,
We praised him for his eyes and silver skin,
And for the little teeth that shone within
His ruddy lips ; the bracken touched his knees,
And through the hours that held no count of sin
We kept his court, until above our din
Night westward drove her glittering argosies.
Oh, lovely days long dead ! There falls on me
In this dim world I may not understand
An echo of your sweetness; in my hand
One frail, sad rose inspires eternity
With dreams that are no more, and from the sea
That beats upon this grey perplexed land,
Blows rumor of some merry drunken band
That keeps your revels still in Arcady.
BICHABD MIDDLETON
[72]
UNDER THE STAES
How the hot revel's fever dies,
Beneath the stillness of the skies!
How suddenly the whirl and glare
Shoot far away, and this cold air
Its icy beverage brings, to chase
The burning wine-flush from my face !
The window's gleam still faintly falls,
And music sounds at intervals,
Jarring the pulses of the night
With whispers of profane delight ;
But on the midnight's awful strand,
Like some wrecked swimmer flung to land,
I lie, and hear those breakers roar :
And smile—they cannot harm me more !
Keep, keep your lamps; they do not mar
The silver of a single star.
The painted roses you display
Drop from your cheeks, and fade away ;
The snowy warmth you bid me see
Is hollowness and mockery ;
The words that make your sin so fair
Grow silent in this vestal air;
The loosened madness of your hair,
That wrapped me in its snaky coils,
No more shall mesh me in your toils;
Your very kisses on my brow
[73]
Burn like the lips of devils now.
O sacred night! O virgin calm!
Teach me the immemorial psalm
Of your eternal watch sublime
Above the grovelling lusts of time !
Within, the orgie shouts and reels ;
Without, the planets' golden wheels
Spin, circling through the utmost space ;
Within, each flushed and reckless face
Is masked to cheat a haunting care ;
Without, the silence and the prayer.
Within, the beast of flesh controls;
Without, the God that speaks in souls!
BAYARD TAYLOR
[74]
". . . the planets' golden wheels
Spin, circling through the utmost space ;"
SHAMELESS LOVE
Thy food my body, and my blood thy wine;
My soul, too, thine, to tread beneath thy feet :
While thus my hair is gold and my breast sweet,
Most rapturous is this shameful life of mine.
But time must come, between my life and thine,
When I must leave the heaven of this heat,
And through the cold, gray twilight go to meet
That night wherein no stars nor moon may shine
A rose, then, withered by fierce passion's sun,
Left soiled and trampled in the public way ;
A broken wine-cup emptied of delight :
Yet would I not, to triumph o'er that day,
Give up one wild, sweet moment of this night,
That finds once more love's tune of joy begun.
PHILIP BOURKE MARSTON
[76]
"Thy food my body, and my blood thy wine ;"
PERFUME
Shake out your hair about me, so,
That I may feel the stir and scent
Of those vague odours come and go
The way our kisses went.
Night gave this priceless hour of love,
But now the dawn steals in apace,
And amorously bends above
The wonder of your face.
"Farewell" between your kisses creeps,
You fade, a ghost, upon the air;
Yet ah! the vacant place still keeps
The odour of your air.
ARTHUE STMONS
[78]
"That I may feel the stir and scent
Of those vague odours come and go"
MAGNIFICAT
Praise God, who wrought for you and me
Your subtle body made for love;
God, who from all eternity
Willed our divided ways should move
Together, and our love should be.
I wandered all these years among
A world of women, seeking you.
Ah, when our fingers met and clung,
The pulses of our bodies knew
Each other: our hearts leapt and sung.
It was not any word of mine,
It was not any look of yours;
Only we knew, and knew for sign
Of Love that comes, Love that endures,
Our veins the chalice of his wine.
Because God willed for us and planned
One perfect love, excelling speech
To tell, or thought to understand,
He made our bodies each for each,
Then put your hand into my hand.
ARTHUR SYMONS
180]
"Ah, when our fingers met and clung,"
BENEDICTINE
The Benedictine scents and stains
The languor of your pallid lips;
My kiss shall be a bee that sips
A fainting roseleaf flushed with rains.
I thirst, and yet my thirst increases
With draining deep and deeper kisses;
The odour of your breath releases
Desires that dream of deeper blisses.
And on my lips your lips now pressed
Cling moist and close; your lips begin
Devouringly to gather in
Your kisses that my lips possessed.
The odour of your breath releases
Wafts of intoxicating blisses;
Yet still my thirst of you increases,
I thirst beneath your thirsty kisses.
No kisses more, this perilous day,
Or, tempting, tempt me not in vain :
This day I dare not taste again
Your lips that suck my soul away!
ARTHUR SYMONS
[82]
"I thirst, and yet my thirst increases"
LEVES AMORES
Your kisses, and the way you curl,
Delicious and distracting girl,
Into one's arms, and round about,
Inextricably in and out
Twining luxuriously, as twine
The clasping tangles of the vine;
So loving to be loved, so gay
And greedy for our holiday;
Strong to embrace and long to kiss,
And strenuous for the sharper bliss,
A little tossing sea of sighs,
Till the slow calm seal up your eyes.
And then how prettily you sleep !
You nestle close and let me keep
My straying fingers in the nest
Of your warm comfortable breast ;
And as I dream, lying awake,
Of sleep well wasted for your sake,
I feel the very pulse and heat
Of your young life-blood beat, and beat
With mine ; and you are mine, my sweet !
ARTHUR SYMONS
[84]
"Twining luxuriously, as twine
The clasping tangles of the vine ;"
IDEALISM
I know the woman has no soul, I know
The woman has no possibilities
Of soul or mind or heart, but merely is
The masterpiece of flesh : well, be it so.
It is her flesh that I adore; I go
Thirsting afresh to drain her empty kiss;
I know she cannot love : 'tis not for this
I rush to her embraces like a foe.
Tyrannously I crave, I crave alone,
Her body, now a silent instrument,
That at my touch shall wake and make for me
The strains that I have dreamed of, and not
known ;
Her perfect body, Earth's most eloquent
Music, the divine human harmony.
ARTHUR SYMONS
[86]
". . . Earth's most eloquent
Music, ..."
BIANOA
Her cheeks are hot, her cheeks are white;
The white girl hardly breathes to-night,
So faint the pulses come and go,
That waken to a smouldering glow
The morbid faintness of her white.
What drowsing heats of sense, desire
Longing and languorous, the fire
Of what white ashes, subtly mesh
The fascinations of her flesh
Into a breathing web of fire?
Only her eyes, only her mouth,
Live, in the agony of drouth,
Athirst for that which may not be :
The desert of virginity
Aches in the hotness of her mouth.
I take her hands into my hands,
Silently, and she understands;
I set my lips upon her lips;
Shuddering to her finger-tips
She strains my hands within her hands.
I set my lips on hers; they close
Into a false and phantom rose ;
Upon her thirsting lips I rain
A flood of kisses, and in vain ;
Her lips inexorably close.
[88]
". . . they close
Into a false and phantom rose ;"
Through her closed lips that cling to mine,
Her hands that hold me and entwine,
Her body that abandoned lies,
Rigid with sterile ecstacies,
A shiver knits her flesh to mine.
Life sucks into a mist remote
Her fainting lips, her throbbing throat;
Her lips that open to my lips,
And, hot against my finger-tips,
The pulses leaping in her throat.
ARTHUR SYMONS
i
[90]
From DUST IN STARLIGHT
The long days opened, full and sweet,
Music through all their pulses beat,
The sun waxed warm, the trees flashed green,
The birds sang loud the boughs between,—
Their songs were in his own heart sung,
And all the earth seemed once more young.
His loneliness—was it not need
Of flesh for flesh? So, once more freed,
He took a girl to walk with him
One twilight by the river; dim,
The lustrous flow beneath them spread,
Where lamps threw green and lamps threw red,
And all along the shadowy walk,
The lovers came to laugh and talk,
To lean upon the parapet
Against the river in silhouette,
Discussing sweet, in lowest tone,
The moon,—until that night unknown ! —
Which burned behind the chimney-pots
And filled with magic vacant lots . . .
Along the stones they scuffed their feet,
Loitering much, for life was sweet,
To count the stars above the steeple,
And search the eyes of all the people,
To laugh at dresses out of fashion
Or some too frank display of passion.
He paused to light a cigarette.
[91]
She said how glad she was they'd met:
Watching with wistful eyes the flame
That warmly lit his hands.—Her name—
It hardly mattered though?—was May;
The name was common out her way.
He took her arm ; they strolled along,
While bargemen sang a smutty song ;
And one by one, remotely, then,
The church bells pealed the hour of ten . . .
. . . Pretty, the river was, at night
When all the lanterns were alight! . . .
Her arm beneath his thumb was warm.
Desire in him took eager form,
The blood rose blossoming to his brain,
He gripped her hand to point of pain.
Yes, it was pretty . . . like romance . . .
Their eyes met in a furtive glance
And could not look away, but burned
Into each other's soul, and yearned,
Shameless and large, for flesh, now sweet,
And the pulses' beat confused with beat . . .
They stood so, silent, swaying slightly,
Smile meeting intimate smile; then lightly,
'Time to go home?—' and while she talked
Along more luminous streets they walked,
Affecting an airiness of tone
Far from the blood's intense sweet drone,
And a light laughter, smooth and sweet,
[92]
Mantling the heart's terrific beat
His hand beneath her elbow pressed,
Feeling the softness of her breast,
Her breast now his ; he could not speak ;
He leaned to her, grown faintly weak;
His lips grew dry; and suddenly came
Sharp realization of his shame,
Torrents of memories filled his brain
Clouding the flesh's bliss with pain,
Whirling his thoughts out like a wind.
Was it betrayal,—had he sinned?
Tumult ensued. He felt her arm
Under his hand, so living warm,
And feeling this, he closed his eyes.
Forbade those troubling dreams to rise,
And suddenly laughed, more swiftly walking,
Listened intently, started talking,
And squeezed her hand; for answer came
A smile indulgent, free from shame,
A smile that stripped her body bare,
Let down her golden-laddered hair . . .
Within her room, she stood a space
To doff her hat ; then raised her face
Drowsy, to kiss, with half-shut eyes,
And clung. He felt her full breast rise
Quivering, soft, beneath his breast;
Body to aching body pressed,
Knee sought for knee to fuse with it;
[93]
Mouth upon mouth fed exquisite;
Fierce hand caught shoulder, yielding waist,
Flesh drank of flesh, to pain embraced,
Slowly, ecstatically moving,
Greedy of every second's loving;
Till, weakening with the ultimate kiss,
She opened soft her mouth to his.
Torrential flesh !—The darkness fell.
Far off ran reelings of a bell
Around the sky; then all was still
Save for vague steps that climbed a hill,
That climbed and climbed, drew ever near,
Came up, grew swift, swelled loud and clear,
Brought rush of winds, confusing roar,
Huge waters upon a sandy shore,
Reverberating, falling, beating,
Withdrawing, rhythmical, repeating,
Filling the night, the seas, the air,
Rising and falling everywhere;
Withdrawal slow; succeeding rush;
Clamor and hush ; clamor and hush . . .
Vast bells upon his body rang,
Clang upon liberating clang;
The whole world cracked and opened up
And spilled its splendor like a cup.



For stony limits cannot hold love out ;
And what love can do, that dares love attempt :
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Jul. If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Rom. Alack! there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords ; look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
Jul. I would not for the world they saw thee
here.
Rom. I have night's cloak to hide me from their
sight ;
And but thou love me, let them find me here ;
My life were better ended by their hate,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
12 LOVE POEMS.
Jul. By whose direction found'st thou out this
place ?
Rom. By love, who first did prompt me to
inquire ;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot ; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Jul. Thou know'st the mask of night is on my
face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
Fain would I dwell on form ; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke — but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me ? I know thou wilt say — Ay :
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Thou may'st prove false : at lovers' perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo!
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully ;
Or, if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse, and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo : but, else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou may'st think my 'havior light ;
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess.
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was 'ware,
My true love's passion ; therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
LOVE POEMS. 13
Rom. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops —
Jul. O swear not by the moon, the inconstant
moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb :
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Rom. What shall I swear by ?
Jul. Do not swear at all ;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.
Rom. If my heart's dear love —
Jul. Well, do not swear! Although I joy in
thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night ;
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
'Ere one can say — It lightens. Sweet, good-night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good-night, good-night! — as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart, as that within my breast!
Rom. Oh, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied ?
Jul. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night ?
Rom. The exchange of thy love's faithful vow
for mine.
Jul. I gave thee mine, before thou didst request
it:
And yet I would it were to give again.
Rom. Would'st thou withdraw it? for what pur
pose, love?
14 LOVE POEMS.
Jul. But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have :
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep ; the more I give to thee,
The more I have ; for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
William Shakespeare.
TO CELIA.
Drink to me only with thine eyes,
And I will pledge with mine ;
Or leave a kiss but in the cup,
And I'll not ask for wine.
The thirst, that from the soul doth rise,
Doth ask a drink divine ;
But might I of Jove's nectar sip,
I would not change for thine.
I sent thee, late, a rosy wreath,
Not so much honoring thee,
As giving it a hope that there
It could not withered be.
But thou thereon didst only breathe
And sent'st it back to me ;
Since when it grows, and smells, I swear,
Not of itself, but thee.
Ben Jonson.
LOVE POEMS. 15
WHY SO WAN AND PALE?
Why so pale and wan, fond lover?
Prithee, why so pale?
Will, when looking well can't move her,
Looking ill prevail?
Prithee, why so pale?
Why so dull and mute, young sinner?
Prithee, why so mute ?
Will, when speaking well can't win her,
Saying nothing do't?
Prithee, why so mute?
Quit, quit for shame ; this will not move :
This cannot take her ;
If of herself she will not love
Nothing can make her ;
The devil take her. Sir John Suckling.
A MA FUTURE.
Where waitest thou,
Lady I am to love? Thou comest not,
Thou knowest of my sad and lonely lot —
I looked for thee ere now.
It is the May,
And each sweet sister soul hath found its brother ;
Only we two seek fondly each the other,
And, seeking, still delay.
1
LOVE POEMS. 11
SERENADE.
Ah, sweet! thou little knowest how
I wake, and passionate watches keep ;
And yet while I address thee now,
Methinks thou smilest in thy sleep.
'Tis sweet enough to make me weep
That tender thought of love and thee,
That while the world is hushed so deep
Thy soul's perhaps awake to me.
Sleep on, sleep on, sweet bride of sleep,
With golden visions for thy dower,
While I this midnight vigil keep,
And bless thee in thy silent bower ;
To me 'tis sweeter than the power
Of sleep, and fairy dreams unfurled,
That I alone, at this still hour,
In patient love outwatch the world.
Thomas Hood.
AE FOND KISS.
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever ;
Ae fareweel, alas! forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
Who shall say that fortune grieves him,
While the star of hope she leaves him?
Me, nae cheerfu' twinkle lights me ;
Dark despair around benights me.
18 LOVE POEMS.
I'll ne'er blame my partial fancy,
Naething could resist my Nancy ;
But to see her was to love her ;
Love but her and love forever.
Had we never loved sae kindly,
Had we never loved sae blindly,
Never met — or never parted,
We had ne'er been broken-hearted.
Fare-thee-weel, thou first and fairest!
Fare-thee-weel, thou best and dearest!
Thine be ilka joy and treasure,
Peace, enjoyment, love, and pleasure!
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever ;
Ae fareweel, alas! forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
Robert Burns.
HIGHLAND MARY.
Ye banks, and braes, and streams around
The castle o' Montgomery,
Green be your woods, and fair your flowers,
Your waters never drumlie!
There Simmer first unfauld your robes,
And there the langest tarry ;
For there I took the last fareweel
O' my sweet Highland Mary.
LOVE POEMS. 19
How sweetly bloomed the gay green birk,
How rich the hawthorn's blossom,
As underneath their fragrant shade
I clasped her to my bosom !
The golden hours, on angel wings,
Flew o'er me and my dearie ;
For dear to me, as light and life,
Was my sweet Highland Mary.
Wi' monie a vow, and locked embrace,
Our parting was fu' tender ;
And, pledging aft to meet again,
We tore oursels asunder ;
But oh! fell death's untimely frost,
That nipt my flower sae early !
Now green's the sod, and cauld's the clay,
That wraps my Highland Mary!
O pale, pale now, those rosy lips,
I aft ha'e kiss'd sae fondly!
And closed for aye the sparkling glance
That dwelt on me sae kindly!
And mould'ring now in silent dust,
That heart that lo'ed me dearly!
But still within my bosom's core
Shall live my Highland Mary. Robert Burns.
20 LOVE. POEMS.
COME, REST IN THIS BOSOM.
Come, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer,
Though the herd have fled from thee, thy home is
still here ;
Here still is the smile, that no cloud can o'ercast.
And a heart and a hand all thy own to the last.
Oh! what was love made for, if 'tis hot the same
Through joy and through torment, through glory
and shame?
I know not, I ask not, if guilt's in that heart,
I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.
Thou hast called me thy Angel in moments of bliss,
And thy Angel I'll be through the horrors of this, —
Through the furnace, unshrinking, thy steps to
pursue,
And shield thee, and save thee, — or perish there
too!
Thomas Moore.
"SHE WAS A PHANTOM OF DELIGHT."
She was a phantom of delight
When first she gleamed upon my sight ;
A lovely apparition, sent
To be a moment's ornament ;
Her eyes as stars of twilight fair ;
Like twilight's, too, her dusky hair ;
But all things else about her drawn,
From May-time and the cheerful dawn ;
LOVE POEMS. 21
A dancing shape, an image gay,
To haunt, to startle, and waylay.
I saw her upon nearer view,
A spirit, yet a woman too!
Her household motions light and free,
And steps of virgin liberty ;
A countenance in which did meet
Sweet records, promises as sweet ;
A creature not too bright or good
For human nature's daily food ;
For transient sorrows, simple wiles,
Praise, blame, love, kisses, tears, and smiles.
And now I see with eye serene
The very pulse of the machine ;
A being breathing thoughtful breath,
A traveller between life and death ;
The reason firm, the temperate will,
Endurance, foresight, strength, and skill ;
A perfect woman, nobly planned,
To warn, to comfort, and command ;
And yet a spirit still, and bright
With something of an angel light.
William Wordsworth.
SHE WALKS IN BEAUTY.
She walks in beauty, like the night
Of cloudless climes and starry skies,
And all that's best of dark and bright
22 LOVE POEMS.
Meets in her aspect and her eyes :
Thus mellowed to that tender light
Which heaven to gaudy day denies.
One shade the more, one ray the less,
Had half-impaired the nameless grace
Which waves in every raven tress,
Or softly lightens o'er her face,
Where thoughts serenely sweet express
How pure, how dear, their dwelling-place.
And on that cheek, and o'er that brow,
So soft, so calm, yet eloquent,
The smiles that win, the tints that glow,
But tell of days in goodness spent, —
A mind at peace with all below,
A heart whose love is innocent.
Lord Byron.
RUTH.
She stood breast high amid the corn,
Clasped by the golden light of morn,
Like the sweetheart of the sun,
Who many a glowing kiss had won.
On her cheek an autumn flush,
Deeply ripened, — such a blush
In the midst of brown was born,
Like red poppies grown with corn.
LOVE POEMS. 23
Round her eyes her tresses fell ;
Which were blackest none could tell,
But long lashes veiled a light,
That had else been all too bright.
And her hat, with shady brim,
Made her tressy forehead dim ; —
Thus she stood amid the stooks,
Praising God with sweetest looks :
Sure, I said, Heaven did not mean
Where I reap thou shouldst but glean ;
Lay thy sheaf adown and come,
Share my harvest and my home.
Thomas Hood.
WHEN WE TWO PARTED.
When we two parted
In silence and tears,
Half broken-hearted,
To sever for years,
Pale grew thy cheek and cold,
Colder thy kiss ;
Truly that hour foretold
Sorrow to this.
The dew of the morning
Sunk chill on my brow —
I felt like the warning
Of what I feel now.
24 LOVE POEMS.
Thy vows are all broken,
And light is thy fame ;
I hear thy name spoken,
And share in its shame.
They name thee before me,
A knell to mine ear,
A shudder comes o'er me —
Why wert thou so dear?
They know not I knew thee,
Who knew thee too well : —
Long, long shall I rue thee,
Too deeply to tell.
In secret we met —
In silence I grieve,
That thy heart could forget,
Thy spirit deceive.
If I should meet thee
After long years,
How should I greet thee? —
In silence and tears.
Lord Byron.
TO THE LADY HAMILTON.
Too late I stayed, — forgive the crime ;
Unheeded flew the hours ;
How noiseless falls the foot of Time,
That only treads on flowers !
LOVE POEMS. 25
What eye with clear account remarks
The ebbing of the glass,
When all its sands are diamond sparks,
That dazzle as they pass !
Oh, who to sober measurement
Time's happy swiftness brings,
When birds of paradise have lent
Their plumage for his wings !
Hon. William Robert Spencer.
ANGEL AND WOMAN.
" When your beauty appears,
In its graces and airs,
All bright as an angel new-dropt from the skies,
At distance I gaze, and am awed by my fears,
So strangely you dazzle my eyes.
" But when without art
Your kind thoughts you impart,
When your love runs in blushes through every vein,
When it darts from your eyes, when it pants at
your heart, —
Then I know that you're woman again."
" There's a passion and pride
In our sex," she replied,
" And thus might I gratify both, I would do, —
Still an angel appear to each lover beside,
But still be a woman to you."
Thomas Parnell.
26 LOVE POEMS.
IMMORTALITY OF LOVE.
They sin who tell us love can die,
With life all other passions fly,
All others are but vanity ;
In heaven ambition cannot dwell,
Nor avarice in the vaults of hell ;
Earthly these passions of the earth,
They perish where they have their birth ;
But love is indestructible :
Its holy flame forever burneth ;
From heaven it came, to heaven returneth.
Too oft on earth a troubled guest,
At times deceived, at times oppressed,
It here is tried and purified,
Then hath in heaven its perfect rest :
It soweth here with toil and care,
But the harvest-time of love is there.
Robert Southev.
FROM "THE ANGEL IN THE HOUSE."
To heroism and holiness
How hard it is for man to soar,
But how much harder to be less
Than what his mistress loves him for!
He does with ease what do he must,
Or lose her, and there's nought debarr'd
From him who's call'd to meet her trust,
LOVE POEMS. 27
And credit her desired regard.
Ah, wasteful woman, she that may
On her sweet self set her own price,
Knowing he cannot choose but pay,
How has she cheapen'd paradise ;
How given for nought her priceless gift,
How spoil'd the bread and spill'd the wine,
Which, spent with due, respective thrift,
Had made brutes men and men divine.
0 Queen! awake to thy renown,
Require what 'tis our wealth to give,
And comprehend and wear the crown
Of thy despised prerogative !
1 who in manhood's name at length
With glad songs come to abdicate
The gross regality of strength,
Must yet in this thy praise abate,
That through thine erring humbleness
And disregard of thy degree,
Mainly, has man been so much less
Than fits his fellowship with thee.
High thoughts had shaped the foolish brow,
The coward had grasp'd the hero's sword,
The vilest had been great, hadst thou,
Just to thyself, been worth's reward :
But lofty honors, undersold,
Seller and buyer both disgrace ;
And favor that makes folly bold
Puts out the light in virtue's face.
28 LOVE POEMS.
Then to my room
I went, and closed and lock'd the door,
And cast myself down on my bed,
And there, with many a blissful tear,
I vow'd to love and pray'd to wed
The Maiden who had grown so dear ;
Thank'd God who had set her in my path ;
And promised, as I hoped to win,
I never would sully my faith
By the least selfishness or sin ;
Whatever in her sight I'd seem
I'd really be ; I'd never blend
With my delight in her a dream
'Twould change her cheek to comprehend ;
And, if she wished it, I'd prefer
Another's to my own success ;
And always seek the best for her
With unofficious tenderness.
Rising, I breathed a brighter clime,
And found myself all self above,
And, with a charity sublime,
Contemned not those who did not love;
And I could not but feel that then
I shone with something of her grace,
And went forth to my fellow men
My commendation in my face.
******
She was all mildness ; yet 'twas writ
Upon her beauty legibly,
" He that's for heaven itself unfit,
LOVE POEMS. 29
Let him not hope to merit me."
And such a challenge, quite apart
From thoughts of love, humbled, and thus
To sweet repentance moved my heart,
And made me more magnanimous,
And led me to review my life,
Inquiring where in aught the least,
If question were of her for wife,
111 might be mended, hope increased :
Not that I soared so far above
Myself, as this great hope to dare :
And yet I half foresaw that love
Might hope where reason would despair.
Coventry Patmore.
A RED, RED ROSE.
Oh, my luve's like a red, red rose,
That's newly sprung in June!
Oh, my luve's like the melodie
That's sweetly play'd in tune!
As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
So deep in luve am I ;
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
Till a' the seas gang dry.
Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear,
And the rocks melt wi' the sun,
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
While the sands o' life shall run.
30 LOVE POEMS.
And fare thee weel, my only luve!
And fare thee weel awhile !
And I will come again, my luve,
Tho' it were ten thousand mile.
Robert Burns.
DRAMA.
He stood beside me.
The embodied vision of the brightest dream,
Which like a dawn heralds the day of life ;
The shadow of his presence made my world
A paradise. All familiar things he touched,
All common words he spoke, became to me
Like forms and sounds of a diviner world.
He was as is the sun in his fierce youth,
As terrible and lovely as a tempest ;
He came, and went, and left me what I am.
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
THE INDIAN SERENADE.
I arise from dreams of thee
In the first sweet sleep of night,
When the winds are breathing low,
And the stars are shining bright.
I arise from dreams of thee,
And a spirit in my feet
Hath led me — who knows how?
To the chamber window, sweet!


LOVE POEMS. 31
The wandering airs they faint
On the dark, the silent stream —
The champak odors fail
Like sweet thoughts in a dream ;
The nightingale's complaint
It dies upon her heart,
As I must die on thine,
Beloved as thou art !
Oh, lift me from the grass !
I die, I faint, I fail !
Let thy love in kisses rain
On my lips and eyelids pale.
My cheek is cold and white, alas!
My heart beats loud and fast :
Oh! press it close to thine again,
Where it will break at last.
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
TO LUCASTA, ON GOING TO THE WARS.
Tell me not, sweet, I am unkind,
That from the nunnery
Of thy chaste breast and quiet mind,
To war and arms I fly.
True, a new mistress now I chase,
The first foe in the field ;
And with a stronger faith embrace,
A sword, a horse, a shield.
32 LOVE POEMS.
Yet this inconstancy is such
As you too shall adore ;
I could not love thee, dear, so much,
Loved I not honor more.
Richard Lovelace.
'TIS SWEET TO THINK.
'Tis sweet to think, that, where'er we may rove,
We are sure to find something blissful and dear,
And that, when we're far from the lips we love,
We've but to make love to the lips we are near.
The heart, like a tendril, accustomed to cling,
Let it grow where it will, cannot flourish alone,
But will lean to the nearest and loveliest thing
It can twine with itself, and make closely its own.
Then, oh ! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
To be sure to find something, still, that is dear.
And to know, when far from the lips we love,
We've but to make love to the lips we are near.
'Twere a shame when flowers around us rise,
To make light of the rest, if the rose isn't there ;
And the world's so rich in resplendent eyes,
'Twere a pity to limit one's love to a pair.
Love's wing and the peacock's are nearly alike,
They are both of them bright, but they're change
able too,
And wherever a new beam of beauty can strike,
It will tincture love's plume with a different hue.
LOVE POEMS. 33
Then oh! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
To be sure to find something still that is dear,
And to know, when far from the lips we love,
We've but to make love to the lips we are near.
Thomas Moore.
THE EVENING TIME.
Together we walked in the evening time,
Above us the sky spread golden and clear,
And he bent his head and looked in my eyes,
As if he held me of all most dear.
Oh! it was sweet in the evening time!
Grayer the light grew and grayer still,
The rooks flitted home through the purple shade ;
The nightingales sang where the thorns stood high,
As I walked with him in the woodland glade.
Oh! it was sweet in the evening time!
And our pathway went through fields of wheat ;
Narrow that path and rough the way,
But he was near and the birds sang true,
And the stars came out in the twilight gray.
Oh! it was sweet in the evening time!
Softly he spoke of the days long past,
Softly of blessed days to be ;
Close to his arm and closer I prest,
The cornfield path was Eden to me.
Oh! it was sweet in the evening time!
34 LOVE POEMS.
And the latest gleams of daylight died ;
My hand in his enfolded lay ;
We swept the dew from the wheat as we passed,
For narrower, narrower, wound the way.
Oh! it was sweet in the evening time.
He looked in the depths of my eyes, and said,
" Sorrow and gladness will come for us, sweet ;
But together we'll walk through the fields of life
Close as we walked through the fields of wheat."
A. C. C.
LINES.
Let other bards of angels sing, —
Bright suns without a spot ;
But thou art no such perfect thing ;
Rejoice that thou art not!
Heed not though none should call thee fair ;
So, Mary, let it be,
If naught in loveliness compare
With what thou art to me.
True beauty dwells in deep retreats,
Whose veil is unremoved
Till heart with heart in concord beats,
And the lover is beloved.
William Wordsworth.
LOVE POEMS. 35
EROS.
The sense of the world is short, —
Long and various the report, —
To love and be beloved ;
Men and gods have not outlearned it ;
And, how oft soe'er they've turned it,
'Tis not to be improved.
Ralph Waldo Emerson.
THE DAY-DREAM.
THE DEPARTURE.
And on her lover's arm she leant,
And round her waist she felt it fold,
And far across the hills they went
In that new world which is the old :
Across the hills, and far away
Beyond their utmost purple rim,
And deep into the dying day
The happy princess followed him.
"I'd sleep another hundred years,
O love, for such another kiss ! "
"Oh! wake forever, love," she hears,
"O love! 'twas such as this and this."
And o'er them many a sliding star,
And many a merry wind was borne.
And, streamed through many a golden bar,
The twilight melted into morn.
36 LOVE POEMS.
" O eyes long laid in happy sleep! "
"O happy sleep, that lightly fled!"
" O happy kiss, that woke thy sleep ! "
" O love, thy kiss would wake the dead ! "
And o'er them many a flowing range
Of vapor buoyed the crescent bark,
And, rapt through many a rosy change,
The twilight died into the dark.
" A hundred summers! can it be?
And whither goest thou, tell me where?"
" O seek my father's court with me,
For there are greater wonders there ! "
And o'er the hills, and far away
Beyond their utmost purple rim,
Beyond the night, across the day,
Through all the world she followed him.
Alfred Tennyson.
THE FLOWER O' DUMBLANE.
The sun has gane down o'er the lofty Ben-Lomond,
And left the red clouds to preside o'er the scene,
While lanely I stray in the calm summer gloamin',
To muse on sweet Jessie, the flower o' Dumblane.
How sweet is the brier, wi' its sauft fauldin' blos
som!
And sweet is the birk, wi' its mantle o' green :
Yet sweeter and fairer, and dear to this bosom,
Is lovely young Jessie, the flower o' Dumblane.
LOVE POEMS. 37
She's modest as ony, and blithe as she's bonny ;
For guileless simplicity makes her its ain ;
And far be the villain, divested of feeling,
Wha'd blight in its bloom the sweet flower o'
Dumblane.
Sing on, thou sweet mavis, thy hymn to the e'ening;
Thou'rt dear to the echoes of Calderwood glen ;
Sae dear to this bosom, sae artless and winning,
Is charming young Jessie, the flower o' Dum
blane.
How lost were my days till I met wi' my Jessie!
The sports o' the city seemed foolish and vain ;
I ne'er saw a nymph I would ca' my dear lassie,
Till charmed wi' sweet Jessie, the flower o' Dum
blane.
Though mine were the station of loftiest grandeur,
Amidst its profusion I'd languish in pain,
And reckon as naething the height o' its splendor,
If wanting sweet Jessie, the flower o' Dumblane.
Robert Tannahill.
WHEN STARS ARE IN THE QUIET SKIES.
When stars are in the quiet skies,
Then most I pine for thee ;
Bend on me then thy tender eyes,
As stars look on the sea!
38 LOVE POEMS.
For thoughts, like waves that glide by night,
Are stillest when they shine.
Mine earthly love lies hushed in light
Beneath the heaven of thine.
There is an hour when angels keep
Familiar watch o'er men,
When coarser souls are wrapped in sleep —
Sweet spirit, meet me then!
There is an hour when holy dreams
Through slumber fairest glide,
And in that mystic hour it seems
Thou shouldst be at my side.
My thoughts of thee too sacred are,
For daylight's common beam ;
I can but know thee as my star,
My angel, and my dream !
When stars are in the quiet skies,
Then most I pine for thee ;
Bend on me then thy tender eyes,
As stars look on the sea !
Edward Bulwer.
LOVE'S THREAD OF GOLD.
In the night she told a story,
In the night and all night through,
While the moon was in her glory,
And the branches dropped with dew.
LOVE POEMS. 39
'Twas my life she told, and round it
Rose the years as from a deep ;
In the world's great heart she found it,
Cradled like a child asleep.
In the night I saw her weaving
By the misty moonbeam cold,
All the weft her shuttle cleaving
With a sacred thread of gold. j
Ah ! she wept me tears of sorrow,
Lulling tears so mystic sweet ;
Then she wove my last to-morrow,
And her web lay at my feet.
Of my life she made the story :
I must weep — so soon 'twas told!
But your name did lend it glory,
And your love its thread of gold!
Jean Ingelow.
MILLAIS'S " HUGUENOTS."
(To H., playing one of Mendelssohn's " Lieder ohne Worte.")
Your favorite picture rises up before me,
Whene'er you play that tune,
I see two figures standing in a garden
In the still August noon.
One is a girl's, with pleading face turned upward
Wild with a great alarm ;
40 LOVE POEMS.
Trembling with haste she binds her 'broidered 'ker
chief,
About the other's arm,
Whose face is bent on her with tender pity,
Whose eyes look into hers,
With a deep meaning, though she cannot read it,
Hers are so dim with tears.
What are they saying in the sunny garden,
With summer flowers ablow?
What gives the woman's voice its passionate plead
ing?
What makes the man's so low?
" See, love," she murmurs, " you shall wear my 'ker
chief,
It is the badge I know ;
And it shall bear you safely thro' the conflict,
If —if—indeed you go.
" You will not wear it ? will not wear my 'kerchief?
Nay! do not tell me why!
I will not listen! If you go without it,
You will go hence to die.
" Hush! do not answer! it is death, I tell you!
Indeed I speak the truth ;
You standing there so warm with life and vigor,
So bright with health and youth,
LOVE POEMS. 41
" You would go hence out of the glowing sunshine,
Out of the garden's bloom,
Out of the living, thinking, feeling present,
Into the unknown gloom! "
Then he makes answer, "Hush, Oh! hush, my dar
ling!
Life is so sweet to me,
So full of hope, you need not bid me guard it,
If such a thing might be!
"If such a thing might be ! But not thro' falsehood ;
I could not come to you,
I dare not stand here in your pure, sweet presence,
Knowing myself untrue."
"It is no sin!" the wild voice interrupts him,
" This is no open strife ;
Have you not often dreamt a nobler warfare,
In which to spend your life?
" Oh ! for my sake, — though but for my sake wear it,
Think what my life would be
If you who gave it first true worth and meaning,
Were taken now from me !
"Think of the long, long days so slowly passing!
Think of the endless years!
I am so young! Must I live out my lifetime
With neither hopes nor fears?"
42 LOVE POEMS.
He speaks again in mournful tones and tender,
But with unswerving faith ;
" Should not love make us braver, aye, and stronger
Either for life or death ?
"And life is hardest. Oh! my love! my treasure!
If I could bear your part
Of this great sorrow, I would go to meet it
With an unshrinking heart.
" Child ! child ! I little dreamt in that bright summer,
When first your love I sought,
Of all the future store of woe and anguish
Which I, unknowing, wrought.
" But you'll forgive me ? yes, you will forgive me,
I know, when I am dead.
I would have loved you — but words have scant
meaning —
God love you now instead! "
And there is silence in the sunny garden,
Until with faltering tone,
She sobs, the while still clinging closer to him,
" Forgive me —go — my own ! "
So human love and faith by death unshaken,
Mingle their glorious psalm ;
Albeit low, until the passionate pleading
Is hushed in deepest calm.
London Spectator.
LOVE POEMS. 43
GOOD-NIGHT.
"Good-night?" No, love! the night is ill
Which severs those it should unite ;
Let us remain together still, —
Then it will be good night.
How were the night without thee good,
Though thy sweet wishes wing its flight?
Be it not said, thought, understood, —
Then it will be good night.
The hearts that on each other beat
From evening close to morning light
Have nights as good as they are sweet,
But never say " Good-night."
Percy Bvsshe Shelley.
HEARTS.
A trinket made like a heart, dear,
Of red gold, bright and fine,
Was given to me for a keepsake,
Given to me for mine.
And another heart, warm and tender,
As true as a heart could be ;
And every throb that stirred it
Was always and all for me.
-H LOVE POEMS.
Sailing over the waters,
Watching the far blue land,
I dropped my golden heart, dear,
Dropt it out of my hand !
It lies in the cold, blue waters,
Fathoms and fathoms deep,
The golden heart which I promised,
Promised to prize and keep.
Gazing at life's bright visions,
So false, and fair, and new,
I forgot the other heart, dear,
Forgot it and lost it too !
I might seek that heart forever,
I might seek and seek in vain, —
And for one short, careless hour,
I pay with a life of pain.
Adelaide Anne Procter.
A HEART FOR EVERY ONE.
Oh, there's a heart for every one,
If every one could find it ;
Then up and seek, ere youth is gone,
Whate'er the toil, ne'er mind it ;
For if you chance to meet at last
With that one heart, intended
To be a blessing unsurpassed,
Till life itself is ended,
LOVE POEMS. 45
How would you prize the labor done,
How grieve if you resigned it ;
For there's a heart for every one,
If every one could find it!
Two hearts are made, the angels say,
To suit each other dearly ;
But each one takes a different way, —
A way not found so clearly!
Yet though we seek, and seek for years,
The pains are worth the taking,
For what the life of home endears
Like hearts of angel's making?
Then haste, and guard the treasure now,
When fondly you've enshrined it,
For there's a heart for every one,
If every one could find it. Charles Swain.
I WAITED TILL THE TWILIGHT.
I waited till the twilight,
And yet he did not come ;
I strayed along the brookside,
And slowly wandered home ;
When who should come behind me,
But him I would have chid ;
He said he came to find me —
Do you really think he did?
46 LOVE POEMS.
He said since last we parted,
He'd thought of naught so sweet,
As of this very moment, —
The moment we should meet.
He showed me where, half-shaded,
A cottage home lay hid ;
He said for me he'd made it —
Do you really think he did ?
He said when first he saw me,
Life seemed at once divine,
Each night he dreamed of angels,
And every face was mine ;
Sometimes, a voice in sleeping,
Would all his hopes forbid ;
And then he'd waken weeping —
Do you really think he did?
Charles Swain.
REST.
Love, give me one of thy dear hands to hold,
Take thou my tired head upon thy breast ;
Then sing me that sweet song we loved of old,
The dear, soft song about our little nest.
We knew the song before the nest was ours ;
We sang the song when first the nest we found ;
We loved the song in happy after-hours,
When peace came to us, and content profound.
Then sing that olden song to me to-night,
While 1, reclining on thy faithful breast,
LOVE POEMS. 47
See happy visions in the fair firelight,
And my whole soul is satisfied with rest.
Better than all our by-gone dreams of bliss,
Are deep content and rest secure as this.
What though we missed love's golden summer-time,
His autumn fruits were ripe when we had leave
To enter joy's wide vineyard in our prime,
Good guerdon for our waiting to receive.
Love gave us no frail pledge of summer flowers,
But side by side we reaped the harvest-field ;
Now side by side we pass the winter hours,
And day by day new blessings are revealed.
The heyday of our youth, its roseate glow,
Its high desires and cravings manifold,
The raptures and delights of long ago
Have passed ; but we have truer joys to hold.
Sing me the dear old song about the nest,
Our blessed home, our little ark of rest.
All The Year Round.
TWIN STARS ALOFT.
Twin stars, aloft in ether clear,
Around each other roll alway,
Within one common atmosphere
Of their own mutual light and day.
And myriad happy eyes are bent
Upon their changeless love alway ;
As strengthened by their one intent,
They pour the flood of life and day.
48 LOVE POEMS.
So we, through this world's waning night,
Shall, hand in hand, pursue our way ;
Shed round us order, love, and light,
And shine unto the perfect day.
Charles Kingsley.
LOVE TOOK ME SOFTLY BY THE HAND.
Love took me softly by the hand,
Love led me all the country o'er,
And showed me beauty in the land,
That I had never seen before —
Never before — never before —
O Love, sweet Love!
There was a glory in the morn,
There was a calmness in the night,
A mildness in the south wind borne,
That I have never felt aright,
Never aright — never aright, —
O Love, sweet Love!
But now it cannot pass away —
I feel it wheresoe'er I go,
And in my heart by night and day
Its gladness moveth to and fro ;
By night and day — by night and day —
O Love, sweet Love!
Anonymous.
LOVE POEMS. 49
SONG.
i.
Nay, but you who do not love her,
Is she not pure gold, my mistress?
Holds earth aught — speak truth — above her?
Aught like this tress, see, and this tress,
And this last fairest tress of all,
So fair, see, ere I let it fall ?
Because, you spend your lives in praising ;
To praise, you search the wide world over ;
Then why not witness, calmly gazing,
If earth holds aught — speak truth — above her?
Above this tress, and this, I touch
But cannot praise, I love so much.
Robert Browning.
SONG.
When sparrows build, and the leaves break forth,
My old sorrow wakes and cries,
For I know there is dawn in the far, far north
And a scarlet sun doth rise.
Like a scarlet fleece the snowfield spreads,
And the icy founts run free,
And the bergs begin to bow their heads,
And plunge, and sail in the sea.
50 LOVE POEMS.
O my lost love, and my own, own love,
And my love that loved me so!
Is there never a chink in the world above
Where they listen for words from below ?
Nay, I spoke once, and I grieved thee sore,
I remember all that I said,
And now thou wilt hear me no more — no more,
Till the sea gives up her dead !
Thou didst set thy foot on the ship, and sail
To the Ice-fields and the snow ;
Thou wert sad, for thy love did not avail,
And the end I could not know ;
How could I tell I should love thee to-day,
Whom that day I held not dear?
How could I know I should love thee away
When I did not love thee anear?
We shall walk no more through the sodden plain
With the faded bents o'erspread ;
We shall stand no more by the seething main
While the dark wrack drives o'erhead ;
We shall part no more in the wind and the rain,
Where thy last farewell was said ;
But perhaps I shall meet thee and know thee again
When the sea gives up her dead.
Jean Ingelow.
LOVE POEMS. 51
DESTINY.
Somewhere there waiteth in this world of ours
For one lone soul another lonely soul,
Each choosing each through all the weary hours,
And meeting strangely at one sudden goal.
Then blend they, like green leaves with golden
flowers,
Into one beautiful and perfect whole ;
And life's long night is ended, and the way
Lies open onward to eternal day.
Edwin Arnold.
LIGHT.
The night has a thousand eyes,
And the day but one,
Yet the light of the bright world dies
With the dying sun.
The mind has a thousand eyes,
And the heart but one,
Yet the light of a whole life dies
When love is done.
Francis W. Bourdillon.
52 LOVE POEMS.
CUPID'S ARROW.
Young Cupid went storming to Vulcan one day,
And besought him to look at his arrow,
" Tis useless! " he cried, " You must mend it, I say,
'Tisn't fit to let fly at a sparrow.
There's something that's wrong in the shaft, or the
dart,
For it flutters quite false to my aim,
'Tis an age since it fairly went home to a heart,
And the world really jests at my name.
" I have straightened, I've bent, I've tried all, I
declare,
I've perfumed it with sweetest of sighs ;
'Tis feathered with ringlets my mother might wear,
And the barb gleams with light from young eyes ;
But it falls without touching — I'll break it, I vow,
For there's Hymen beginning to pout,
He's complaining his torch beams so dull and so low,
That Zephyr might puff it right out."
Little Cupid went on with his pitiful tale,
Till Vulcan the weapon restored ;
" There, take it, young sir, try it now. If it fail,
I will ask neither fee nor reward ! "
The urchin shot out, and rare havoc he made,
The wounded and dead were untold,
But no wonder the rogue had such slaughtering trade,
For the arrow was laden with gold.
Eliza Cook.
LOVE POEMS.
TWO LOVERS.
Two lovers by a moss-grown spring ;
They leaned soft cheeks together there,
Mingled the dark and sunny hair,
And heard the wooing thrushes sing.
O budding time!
O love's blest prime!
Two wedded from the portal stept ;
The bells made happy carolings,
The air was soft as fanning wings,
White petals on the pathway slept.
O pure-eyed bride!
O tender pride!
Two faces o'er a cradle bent ;
Two hands above the head were locked ;
These pressed each other while they rocked
Those watched a life that love had sent.
O solemn hour!
O hidden power!
Two parents by the evening fire ;
The red light fell about their knees
On heads that rose by slow degrees
Like buds upon the lily-spire.
O patient life!
O tender strife!
54 LOVE POEMS.
The two still sat together there,
The red light shone about their knees ;
But all the heads by slow degrees
Had gone and left that lonely pair.
O voyage fast !
O vanished past!
The red light shone upon the floor,
And made the space between them wide ;
They drew their chairs up side by side,
Their pale cheeks joined, and said, " Once more! "
O memories!
O past that is !
George Eliot.
THE LOW-BACKED CAR.
When first I saw sweet Peggy,
'Twas on a market day :
A low-backed car she drove, and sat
Upon a truss of hay ;
But when that hay was blooming grass,
And decked with flowers of spring,
No flower was there that could compare
With the blooming girl I sing.
As she sat in the low-backed car,
The man at the turnpike bar
Never asked for the toll,
But just rubbed his owld poll,
And looked after the low-backed car.
LOVE POEMS. 55
In battle's wild commotion,
The proud and mighty Mars
With hostile scythes demands his tithes
Of death, in warlike cars ;
While Peggy, peaceful goddess,
Has darts in her bright eye,
That knock men down in the market town,
As right and left they fly ;
While she sits in her low-backed car,
Than battle more dangerous far ; —
For the doctor's art
Cannot cure the heart,
That is hit from that low-backed car.
Sweet Peggy, robnd her car, sir,
Has strings of ducks and geese,
But the scores of hearts she slaughters
By far outnumber these ;
While she among her poultry sits,
Just like a turtle-dove,
Well worth the cage, I do engage,
Of the blooming god of Love!
While she sits in her low-backed car,
The lovers come near and far ;
And envy the chicken
That Peggy is pickin',
As she sits in her low-backed car.
Oh! I'd rather own that car, sir,
With Peggy by my side,
Than a coach and four and gold galore,
And a lady for my bride ;
56 LOVE POEMS.
For a lady would sit forninst me,
On a cushion made with taste,
While Peggy would sit beside me,
With my arm around her waist, —
While we drove in the low-backed car,
To be married by Father Mahar ;
Oh! my heart would beat high
At her glance and her sigh, —
Though it beat in a low-backed car.
Samuel Lover.
COME INTO THE GARDEN, MAUD.
Come into the garden, Maud,
For the black bat, night, has flown,
Come into the garden, Maud,
I am here at the gate alone ;
And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad,
And the musk of the roses blown.
For a breeze of morning moves,
And the planet of Love is on high,
Beginning to faint in the light that she loves
On a bed of daffodil sky,
To faint in the light of the sun she loves,
To faint in his light, and to die.
All night have the roses heard
The flute, violin, bassoon ;
All night has the casement jessamine stirred
To the dancers dancing in tune :
LOVE POEMS. 57
Till a hush fell with the waking bird,
And a hush with the setting moon.
I said to the lily : " There is but one
With whom she has heart to be gay.
When will the dancers leave her alone?
She is weary of dance and play."
Now half to the setting moon are gone,
And half to the rising day ;
Low on the sand and loud on the stone
The last wheel echoes away.
I said to the rose : " The brief night goes,
In babble and revel and wine.
O young lord-lover, what sighs are those,
For one that will never be thine?
But mine, but mine," so I sware to the rose,
" Forever and ever, mine."
And the soul of the rose went into my blood,
As the music clashed in the hall ;
And long by the garden lake I stood,
For I heard your rivulet fall
From the lake to the meadow and on to the wood,
Our wood that is dearer than all.
From the meadow your walks have left so sweet
That whenever a March-wind sighs
He sets the jewel-print of your feet
In violets blue as your eyes,
58 LOVE POEMS.
To the woody hollows in which we meet
And the valleys of Paradise.
The slender acacia would not shake
One long milk-bloom on the tree ;
The white lake-blossom fell into the lake,
As the pimpernel dozed on the lea ;
But the rose was awake all night for your sake,
Knowing your promise to me ;
The lilies and roses were all awake,
They sighed for the dawn and thee.
Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls,
Come hither, the dances are done.
In gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls,
Queen lily and rose in one ;
Shine out little head, sunning over with curls,
To the flowers, and be their sun.
There has fallen a splendid tear
From the passion-flower at the gate.
She is coming, my dove, my dear ;
She is coming, my life, my fate ;
The red rose cries, " She is near, she is near " ;
And the white rose weeps, " She is late " ;
The larkspur listens, " I hear, I hear " ;
And the lily whispers, " I wait."
She is coming, my own, my sweet ;
Were it ever so airy a tread,
My heart would hear her and beat,
Were it earth in an earthy bed ;
LOVE POEMS. 59
My dust would hear her and beat,
Had I lain for a century dead ;
Would start and tremble under her feet,
And blossom in purple and red.
Alfred Tennyson.
SONNETS.
" Era gia l'ora che volge il desio." — Dante.
" Ricorro al tempo ch'io vi vidi prima." — Petrarca.
I wish I could remember that first day,
First hour, first moment of your meeting me,
If bright or dim the season, it might be
Summer or Winter for aught I can say ;
So unrecorded did it slip away,
So blind was I to see and to foresee,
So dull to mark the budding of my tree
That would not blossom yet for many a May.
If only I could recollect it, such
A day of days ! I let it come and go
As traceless as a thaw of bygone snow ;
It seemed to mean so little, meant so much ;
If only now I could recall that touch
First touch of hand in hand — did one but know!
" E drizzeremo gli occhi al Primo Amore." — Dante.
" Ma trovo peso non da le mie braccia." — PETRARCA.
If I could trust mine own self with your fate,
Shall I not rather trust it in God's hand?
Without Whose Will one lily doth not stand,
60 LOVE POEMS.
Nor sparrow fall at his appointed date ;
Who numbereth the innumerable sand,
Who weighs the wind and water with a weight,
To Whom the world is neither small nor great,
Whose knowledge foreknew every plan we planned,
Searching my heart for all that touches you,
I find there only love and love's goodwill
Helpless to help and impotent to do,
Of understanding dull, of sight most dim ;
And therefore I commend you back to Him
Whose love your love's capacity can fill.
" Amor, che ne la mente mi ragiona." — DANTE.
" Amor vien nel bel viso di costei." — PF.TRARCA.
If there be any one can take my place
And make you happy whom I grieve to grieve,
Think not that I can grudge it, but believe
I do commend you to that nobler grace,
That readier wit than mine, that sweeter face ;
Yea, since your riches make me rich, conceive
I too am crowned, while bridal crowns I weave,
And thread the bridal dance with jocund pace.
For if I did not love you, it might be
That I should grudge you some one dear delight ;
But since the heart is yours that was mine own
Your pleasure is my pleasure, right my right,
Your honorable freedom makes me free,
And you companioned I am not alone.
Christina G. Rossetti.
LOVE POEMS. 61
BECAUSE.
It is not because your heart is mine —mine onlyMine alone ;
It is not because you chose me, weak and lonely,
For your own ;
Not because the earth is fairer, and the skies
Spread above you
Are more radiant for the shining of your eyes —
That I love you!
It is not because the world's perplexed meaning
Grows more clear ;
And the Parapets of Heaven, with angels leaning,
Seem more near ;
And Nature sings of praise with all her voices
Since yours spoke,
Since within my silent heart, that now rejoices,
Love awoke!
Nay, not even because your hand holds heart and
life ;
At your will
Soothing, hushing all its discord, making strife
Calm and still ;
Teaching Trust to fold her wings, nor ever roam
From her nest ;
Teaching Love that her securest, safest home
Must be Rest.
62 LOVE POEMS.
But because this human Love, though true and
sweet —
Yours and mine —
Has been sent by Love more tender, more complete,
More divine ;
That it leads our hearts to rest at last in Heaven,
Far above you ;
Do I take you as a gift that God has given —
And I love you!
Adelaide Anne Procter.
THE BANKS OF DOON.
Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair ;
How can ye chant, ye little birds,
And I sae weary fu' o' care!
Thou'lt break my heart, thou warbling bird,
That wantons through the flowering thorn.
Thou 'minds me o' departed joys,
Departed — never to return!
Aft ha'e I roved by bonnie Doon,
To see the rose and woodbine twine ;
And ilka bird sang o' its luve,
And fondly sae did I o' mine.
Wi' lightsome heart I pu'd a rose,
Fu' sweet upon its thorny tree ;
And my fause luver stole my rose,
But ah! he left the thorn wi' me.
Robert Burns.
LOVE POEMS.
I LOVE MY JEAN.
O' A' the airts the wind can blaw,
I dearly lo'e the west,
For there the bonnie lassie lives,
The lass that I lo'e best :
There wild woods grow, and rivers row,
Wi' mony a hill between ;
But day and night my fancy's flight
Is ever wi' my Jean.
I see her in the dewy flowers,
Sae lovely sweet and fair :
I hear her voice in ilka bird,
Wi' music charm the air :
There's not a bonnie flower that springs
By fountain, shaw, or green ;
There's not a bonnie bird that sings,
But minds me o' my Jean. Robert Burns.
A VALEDICTION.
God be with thee, my beloved — God be with thee !
Else alone thou goest forth,
Thy face unto the north,
Moor and pleasance all around thee and beneath
thee,
Looking equal in one snow ;
While I who try to reach thee,
Vainly follow, vainly follow.
64 LOVE POEMS.
With the farewell and the hollo,
And cannot reach thee so.
Alas, I can but teach thee!
God be with thee, my beloved — God be with thee.
Can I teach thee, my beloved —can I teach thee ?
If I said, " Go left or right,"
The counsel would be light.
The wisdom, poor of all that could enrich thee,
My right would show like left ;
My raising would depress thee,
My choice of light would blind thee, Of way, would leave behind thee,
Of end, would leave bereft.
Alas, I can but bless thee !
May God teach thee, my beloved —may God teach
thee!
Can I bless thee, my beloved —can I bless thee?
What blessing word can I
From mine own tears keep dry?
What flowers grow in my field wherewith to dress
thee?
My good reverts to ill ;
My calmnesses would move thee,
My softnesses would prick thee,
My bindings up would break thee,
My crownings, curse and kill.
Alas, I can but love thee!
May God bless thee, my beloved —may God bless
thee.
LOVE POEMS. 65
Can I love thee, my beloved — can I love thee ?
And is this like love to stand
With no help in my hand,
When strong as death I fain would watch above
thee?
My love-kiss can deny
No tear that falls beneath it ;
Mine oath of love can swear thee
From no ill that comes near thee -
And thou diest while I breathe it.
And I — I can but die !
May God love thee, my beloved —may God love
thee.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
A CHAIN.
The bond that links our souls together ;
Will it last through stormy weather?
Will it moulder and decay
As the long hours pass away?
Will it stretch if Fate divide us,
When dark and weary hours have tried us?
O, if it look too poor and slight,
Let us break the links to-night !
It was not forged by mortal hands,
Or clasped with golden bars and bands ;
Save thine and mine, no other eyes
The slender link can recognize :
66 LOVE POEMS.
In the bright light it seems to fade —
And it is hidden in the shade ;
While Heaven nor Earth have never heard,
Or solemn vow, or blighted word.
Yet what no mortal hand could make
No mortal power can ever break ;
What words or vows could never do,
No words or vows can make untrue ;
And if to other hearts unknown
The dearer and the more our own,
Because too sacred and divine
For other eyes, save thine and mine.
And see, though slender, it is made
Of Love and Trust, and can they fade ?
While, if too slight it seem, to bear
The breathings of the summer air,
We know that it could bear the weight
Of a most heavy heart of late,
And as each day an hour flew
The stronger for its burden grew.
And, too, we know and feel again
It has been sanctified by pain,
For what God deigns to try with sorrow
He means not to decay to-morrow ;
But through that fiery trial at last
When earthly ties and bonds are past ;
What slighter things dare not endure
Will make our Love more safe and pure.
LOVE POEMS. 67
Love shall be purified by Pain,
And Pain be soothed by Love again :
So let us now take heart and go
Cheerfully on, through joy and woe ;
No change the summer sun can bring,
Or the inconstant skies of spring,
Or the bleak winter's stormy weather,
For we shall meet them, Love, together!
Adelaide Anne Procter.
LOVE WAKES AND WEEPS.
Love wakes and weeps
While Beauty sleeps ;
Oh ! for music's softest numbers
To prompt a theme
For Beauty's dream,
Soft as the pillow of her slumbers!
Through groves of palm
Sigh gales of ialm ;
Fire-flies on the air are wheeling ;
While through the gloom
Comes soft perfume,
The distant beds of flowers revealing.
Oh! wake and live!
No dreams can give
A shadowed bliss the real excelling ;
No longer sleep —
From lattice peep,
And list the tale that love is telling!
Sir Walter Scott.
68 LOVE POEMS.
IN THREE DAYS.
So I shall see her in three days
And just one night, but nights are short ;
Then two long hours, and that is morn.
See how I come, unchanged, unworn!
Feel where my life broke off from thine
How fresh the splinters keep and fine, —
Only a touch and we combine!
Too long, this time of year, the days,
But nights, at least, the nights are short.
As night shows where her one moon is,
A hand's breadth of pure light and bliss,
So life's night gives my lady birth
And my eyes hold her! What is worth
The rest of heaven, the rest of earth ?
O loaded curls, release your store
Of warmth and scent, as once before
The tingling hair did, lights and darks
Out breaking into fairy sparks,
When under curl and curl I pried
After the warmth and scent inside.
Through lights and darks how manifold —
The dark inspired, the light controlled!
As early Art embrowns the gold.
What great fear, should one say, " Three days
That change the world might change as well
Your fortune ; and if joy delays,
Be happy that no worse befell!"
LOVE POEMS. 69
What small fear, if another says,
" Three days and one short night beside
May throw no shadow on your ways.
But years must turn with change untried,
With chance not easily defied,
With an end somewhere undescried."
No fear! —or if a fear be born
This minute, it dies out in scorn.
Fear? I shall see her in three days
And one night, now the nights are short,
Then just two hours and that is morn.
Robert Browning.
THE BONNIE WEE THING.
Bonnie wee thing, cannie wee thing,
Lovely wee thing, wast thou mine,
I wad wear thee in my bosom,
Lest my jewel I should tine.
Wistfully I look and languish
In that bonnie face of thine,
And my heart it stounds wi' anguish,
Lest my wee thing be na mine.
Wit, and grace, and love, and beauty
In ae constellation shine ;
To adore thee is my duty,
Goddess o' this soul o' mine!
70 LOVE POEMS.
Bonnie wee thing, cannie wee thing,
Lovely wee thing, wast thou mine,
I wad wear thee in my bosom,
Lest my jewel I should tine.
Robert Burns.
ANNIE LAURIE.
Maxwelton braes are bonnie
Where early fa's the dew,
And it's there that Annie Laurie
Gie'd me her promise true, —
Gie'd me her promise true,
Which ne'er forgot will be,
And for bonnie Annie Laurie
I'd lay me doune and dee.
Her brow is like the snaw drift ;
Her throat is like the swan ;
Her face it is the fairest
That e'er the sun shone on, —
That e'er the sun shone on,
And dark blue is her ee ;
And for bonnie Annie Laurie
I'd lay me doune and dee.
Like dew on the gowan lying
Is the fa' o' her fairy feet ;
And like the winds in summer sighing
Her voice is low and sweet, —
Her voice is low and sweet ;
LOVE POEMS. 71
And she's a' the world to me ;
And for bonnie Annie Laurie
I'd lay me doune and dee.
Douglas of Finland.
I'LL NEVER LOVE THEE MORE.
My dear and only love, I pray
That little world of thee,
Be governed by no other sway
Than purest monarchy :
For if confusion have a part,
Which virtuous souls abhor,
And hold a synod in thy heart,
I'll never love thee more.
As Alexander I will reign,
And I will reign alone ;
My thoughts did evermore disdain
A rival on my throne.
He either fears his fate too much,
Or his deserts are small,
Who dares not put it to the touch
To gain or lose it all.
But I will reign and govern still,
And always give the law,
And have each subject at my will,
And all to stand in awe ;
72 LOVE POEMS.
But 'gainst my batteries if I find
Thou storm, or vex me sore,
As if thou set me as a blind,
I'll never love thee more.
And in the empire of thy heart,
Where I should solely be,
If others do pretend a part,
Or dare to share with me, —
Or committees if thou erect,
Or go on such a score,
I'll smiling mock at thy neglect,
And never love thee more.
But if no faithless action stain
Thy love and constant word,
I'll make thee famous by my pen,
And glorious by my sword ;
I'll serve thee in such noble ways
As ne'er was known before,
I'll deck and crown thy head with bays,
And love thee more and more.
James Graham, Marquis ofMontrose.
ROSALIND'S MADRIGAL.
Love in my bosom, like a bee,
Doth suck his sweet ;
Now with his wings he plays with me,
Now with his feet.
LOVE POEMS. 73
Within mine eyes he makes his nest,
His bed amidst my tender breast ;
My kisses are his daily feast,
And yet he robs me of my rest :
Ah, wanton, will ye ?
And if I sleep, then percheth he
With pretty flight,
And makes his pillow of my knee,
The livelong night.
Strike I my lute, he tunes the string ;
He music plays if so I sing ;
He lends me every lovely thing,
Yet cruel he my heart doth sting :
Whist, wanton, still ye.
Else I with roses every day
Will whip you hence,
And blind you when you long to play,
For your offence ;
I'll shut mine eyes to keep you in ;
I'll make you fast it for your sin ;
I'll count your power not worth a pin ;
Alas! what hereby shall I win,
If he gainsay me ?
What if I beat the wanton boy
With many a rod?
He will repay me with annoy,
Because a god.
Then sit thou safely on my knee.
LOVE POEMS.
And let thy bower my bosom be ;
Lurk in mine eyes, I like of thee,
O Cupid! so thou pity me,
Spare not, but play thee.
Thomas Lodge.
SONG.
Pack clouds away, and welcome day,
With night we banish sorrow ;
Sweet air, blow soft, mount lark, aloft,
To give my love good-morrow.
Wings from the wind to please her mind,
Notes from the lark, I'll borrow ;
Bird, prune thy wing! Nightingale, sing!
To give my love good-morrow.
To give my love good-morrow,
Notes from them all I'll borrow.
Wake from thy nest, robin-redbreast!
Sing, birds, in every furrow ;
And from each bill let music shrill
Give my fair love good-morrow !
Blackbird and thrush, in every bush,
Stare, linnet, and cock-sparrow,
You pretty elves, amongst yourselves,
Sing my fair love good-morrow.
To give my love good-morrow,
Sing, birds, in every furrow.
Thomas Heywood.
LOVE POEMS. 75
SONG.
Ask me no more where Jove bestows,
When June is past, the fading rose ;
For in your beauties, orient deep,
These flowers, as in their causes, sleep.
Ask me no more whither do stray
The golden atoms of the day ;
For in pure love heaven did prepare
Those powders to enrich your hair.
Ask me no more whither doth haste
The nightingale, when May is past ;
For in your sweet dividing throat
She winters, and keeps warm her note.
******
Ask me no more if east or west
The Phoenix builds her spicy nest ;
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies !
Thomas Carew.
THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS
LOVE.
Come live with me, and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove,
That hill and valley, grove and field,
gy mountains yield.
76 LOVE POEMS.
And we will sit upon the rocks,
Seeing the shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals.
And I will make thee beds of roses,
And a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle,
Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle ;
A gown made of the finest wool,
Which from our pretty lambs we pull ;
Fair-lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold.
A belt of straw and ivy buds,
With coral clasps and amber studs ;
And if these pleasures may thee move,
Come live with me and be my love.
The shepherd swains shall dance and sing,
For thy delight each May-morning.
If these delights thy mind may move,
Come live with me and be my love.
Christopher Marlowe.
MOVE EASTWARD, HAPPY EARTH.
Move eastward, happy earth, and leave
Yon orange sunset waning slow ;
From fringes of the faded eve,
O, happy planet, eastward go ;
LOVE POEMS. 77
Till over thy dark shoulder glow
Thy silver sister-world, and rise
To glass herself in dewy eyes
That watch me from the glen below.
Ah, bear me with thee, lightly borne,
Dip forward under starry light,
And move me to my marriage-morn,
And round again to happy night.
Alfred Tennyson.
SERENADE.
Now the toils of day are over,
And the sun hath sunk to rest,
Seeking, like a fiery lover,
The bosom of the blushing west —
The faithful night keeps watch and ward,
Raising the moon her silver shield,
And summoning the stars to guard
The slumbers of my fair Mathilde!
The faithful night! Now all things lie
Hid by her mantle dark and dim,
In pious hope I hither hie,
And humbly chant mine evening hymn.
Thou art my prayer, my saint, my shrine!
(For never holy pilgrim kneel'd
Or wept at feet more pure than thine),
My virgin love, my sweet Mathilde!
William Makepeace Thackeray.
78 LOVE POEMS.
MY STAR.
All that I know
Of a certain star
Is, it can throw
(Like an angled spar)
Now a dart of red,
Now a dart of blue,
Till my friends have said
They would fain see, too,
My star that dartles the red and the blue i
Then it stops like a bird ; like a flower, hangs furled ;
They must solace themselves with the Saturn
above it.
What matter to me if their star is a world?
Mine has opened its soul to me ; therefore I
love it.
Robert Browning.
WHEN THOU ART NEAR ME.
When thou art near me,
Sorrow seems to fly,
And then I think, as well I may,
That on this earth there is no one
More blest than I.
But when thou leav'st me,
Doubts and fears arise,
And darkness reigns,
Where all before was light.
LOVE POEMS. 79
The sunshine of my soul
Is in those eyes,
And when they leave me
All the world is night.
But when thou art near me,
Sorrow seems to fly,
And then I feel, as well I may,
That on this earth there dwells not one
So blest as I. Lady John Scott.
ONE MORNING, OH ! SO EARLY.
One morning, oh! so early, my beloved, my be
loved,
All the birds were singing blithely, as if never they
would cease ;
'Twas a thrush sang in my garden, " Hear the story,
hear the story ! "
And the lark sang, " Give us glory ! "
And the dove said, " Give us peace! "
Then I listened, oh! so early, my beloved, my be
loved,
To that murmur from the woodland of the dove, my
dear, the dove ;
When the nightingale came after, " Give us fame to
sweeten duty!"
When the wren sang, " Give us beauty! "
She made answer, " Give us love! "
80 LOVE POEMS.
Sweet is spring, and sweet the morning, my be
loved, my beloved ;
Now for us doth spring, doth morning, wait upon
the year's increase,
And my prayer goes up, " Oh, give us, crowned in
youth with marriage glory,
Give for all our life's dear story,
Give us love, and give us peace ! "
Jean Ingelow.
BEFORE THE DAYBREAK.
Before the daybreak shines a star
That in the day's great glory fades ;
Too fiercely bright is the full light
That her pale-gleaming lamp upbraids.
Before the daybreak sings a bird
That stills her song ere morning light :
Too loud for her is the day's stir,
The woodland's thousand-tongued delight.
Ah! great the honor is, to shine
A light wherein no traveller errs ;
And rich the prize to rank divine
Among the world's loud choristers.
But I would be that paler star,
And I would be that lonelier bird,
To shine with hope, while hope's afar,
And sing of love, when love's unheard.
Francis W. Bourdillon,
LOVE POEMS. 81
A WARNING.
Place your hands in mine, dear,
With their rose-leaf touch :
If you heed my warning,
It will spare you much.
Ah ! with just such smiling
Unbelieving eyes,
Years ago I heard it : —
You shall be more wise.
You have one great treasure,
Joy for all your life ;
Do not let it perish
In one reckless strife.
Do not venture all, child,
In one frail, weak heart ;
So, through any shipwreck,
You may save a part.
Where your soul is tempted
Most to trust your fate,
There, with double caution,
Linger, fear, and wait.
Measure all you give, still
Counting what you take ;
Love for love, so placing
Each an equal stake.
LOVE POEMS.
Treasure love ; though readyStill to live without. In your fondest trust, keep
Just one thread of doubt.
Build on no to-morrow ;
Love has but to-day :
If the links seem slackening,
Cut the bond away.
Trust no prayer nor promise ;
Words are grains of sand :
To keep your heart unbroken,
Hold it in your hand.
That your love may finish
Calm as it begun, Learn this lesson better,
Dear, than I have done.
Years hence, perhaps, this warning
You shall give again, In just the self-same words, dear,
And —just as much — in vain.
Adelaide Anne Procter.
TO MARY.
I seem, in the midst of the crowd,
The lightest of all ;
My laughter rings cheery and loud
In banquet and ball.
LOVE POEMS. 83
My lip hath its smiles and its sneers,
For all men to see ;
But my soul, and my truth, and my tears,
Are for thee, are for thee !
Around me they flatter and fawn —
The young and the old,
The fairest are ready to pawn
Their hearts for my gold.
They sue me — I laugh as I spurn
The slaves at my knee ;
But in faith and in fondness I turn
Unto thee, unto thee!
William Makepeace Thackeray.
THE INVITATION.
Best and Brightest, come away,
Fairer far than this fair day,
Which, like thee, to those in sorrow
Comes to bid a sweet good-morrow
To the rough year just awake
In its cradle on the brake.
The brightest hour of unborn Spring,
Through the winter wandering,
Found, it seems, the halcyon morn
To hoar February born ;
Bending from Heaven, in azure mirth,
It kissed the forehead of the earth,
And smiled upon the silent sea,
And bade the frozen streams be free,
LOVE POEMS.
And waked to music all their fountains,
And breathed upon the frozen mountains,
And like a prophetess of May
Strewed flowers upon the barren way,
Making the wintry world appear
Like one on whom thou smilest, Dear.
Away, away, from men and towns,
To the wild wood and the downs, —
To the silent wilderness,
Where the soul need not repress
Its music, lest it should not find
An echo in another's mind,
While the touch of Nature's art
Harmonizes heart to heart.
Radiant Sister of the Day,
Awake! arise! and come away!
To the wild woods and the plains,
To the pools where winter rains
Image all their roof of leaves,
Where the pine its garland weaves
Of sapless green, and ivy dun, —
Round stems that never kiss the sun, —
Where the lawns and pastures be,
And the sandhills of the sea,
Where the melting hoar-frost wets
The daisy-star that never sets,
And wind-flowers and violets
Which yet join not scent to hue
Crown the pale year weak and new ;
LOVE POEMS. 85
When the night is left behind
In the deep east, dim and blind,
And the blue noon is over us,
And the multitudinous
Billows murmur at our feet,
Where the earth and ocean meet,
And all things seem only one
In the universal Sun.
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER.
It is the miller's daughter,
And she is grown so dear, so dear,
That I would be the jewel
That trembles at her ear :
For hid in ringlets day and night,
I touch her neck so warm and white.
And I would be the girdle
About her dainty dainty waist,
And her heart would beat against me,
In sorrow and in rest.
And I should know if it beat right,
I'd clasp it round so close and tight.
And I would be the necklace,
And all day long to fall and rise
Upon her balmy bosom,
With her laughter cr her sighs,
And I would lie so light, so light,
I scarce should be unclasp'd at night.
Alfred Tennyson.
86 LOVE POEMS.
A VOICE BY THE CEDAR TREE.
A voice by the cedar tree,
In the meadow under the Hall!
She is singing an air that is known to me,
A passionate ballad gallant and gay,
A martial song like a trumpet's call!
Singing alone in the morning of life,
In the happy morning of life and of May,
Singing of men that in battle array,
Ready in heart and ready in hand,
March with banner and bugle and fife
To the death, for their native land.
ii.
Maud with her exquisite face,
And wild voice pealing up to the sunny sky,
And feet like sunny gems on an English green,
Maud in the light of her youth and her grace,
Singing of Death, and of Honor that cannot die,
Till I well could weep for a time so sordid and
mean,
And myself so languid and base.
ill.
Silence, beautiful voice!
Be still, for you only trouble the mind
With a joy in which I cannot rejoice,
A glory I shall not find.
LOVE POEMS. '87
Still! I will hear you no more,
For your sweetness hardly leaves me a choice
But to move to the meadow and fall before
Her feet on the meadow grass, and adore,
Not her, who is neither courtly nor kind,
Not her, not her, but a voice.
Alfred Tennyson.
DIVIDED.
An empty sky, a world of heather,
Purple of foxglove, yellow of broom ;
We two among them wading together,
Shaking out honey, treading perfume.
Crowds of bees are giddy with clover,
Crowds of grasshoppers skip at our feet,
Crowds of larks at their matins hang over
Thanking the Lord for a life so sweet.
Flusheth the rise with her purple favor,
Gloweth the cleft with her golden ring,
'Twixt the two brown butterflies waver,
Lightly settle, and sleepily swing.
We two walk till the purple dieth
And short dry grass under foot is brown,
But one little streak at a distance lieth
Green like a ribbon to prank the down.
88 LOVE POEMS.
II.
Over the grass we stepped unto it,
And God He knoweth how blithe we were!
Never a voice to bid us eschew it :
Hey the green ribbon that showed so fair!
Hey the green ribbon! we kneeled beside it,
We parted the grasses dewy and sheen ;
Drop over drop there filtered and slided
A tiny bright beck that trickled between.
Tinkle, tinkle, sweetly it sung to us,
Light was our talk as of faery bells —
Faery wedding-bells faintly rung to us
Down in their fortunate parallels.
Hand in hand, while the sun peered over,
We lapped the grass on that youngling spring :
Swept back its rushes, smoothed its clover,
And said, " Let us follow it westering."
in.
A dapple sky, a world of meadows,
Circling above us the black rooks fly
Forward, backward ; lo, their dark shadows
Flit on the blossoming tapestry —
Flit on the beck, for her long grass parteth
As hair from a maid's bright eyes blown back ;
And, lo, the sun like a lover darteth
His flattering smile on her wayward track.
LOVE POEMS. 89
Sing on! we sing in the glorious weather
Till one steps over the tiny strand,
So narrow, in sooth, that still together
On either brink we go hand in hand.
The beck grows wider, the hands must sever.
On either margin, our songs all done,
We move apart, while she singeth ever,
Taking the course of the stooping sun.
He prays, " Come over " — I may not follow ;
I cry, " Return " — but he cannot come :
We speak, we laugh, but with voices hollow ;
Our hands are hanging, our hearts are numb.
IV.
A breathing sigh, a sigh for answer,
A little talking of outward things :
The careless beck is a merry dancer,
Keeping sweet time to the air she sings.
A little pain when the beck grows wider;
" Cross to me now — for her wavelets swell " :
" I may not cross " — and the voice beside her
Faintly reacheth, though heeded well.
No backward path ; ah ! no returning ;
No second crossing that ripple's flow :
" Come to me now, for the west is burning ;
Come ere it darkens ; " — " Ah, no! ah, no! "
90 LOVE POEMS.
Then cries of pain, and arms outreaching —
The beck grows wider and swift and deep :
Passionate words as of one beseeching —
The loud beck drowns them ; we walk, and weep.
A yellow moon in splendor drooping,
A tired queen with her state oppressed*
Low by rushes and swordgrass stooping,
Lies she soft on the waves at rest.
The desert heavens have felt her sadness ;
Her earth will weep her some dewy tears ;
The wild beck ends her tune of gladness,
And goeth stilly as soul that fears.
We two walk on in our grassy places
On either marge of the moonlit flood,
With the moon's own sadness in our faces,
Where joy is withered, blossom and bud.
VI.
A shady freshness, chafers whirring,
A little piping of leaf-hid birds ;
A flutter of wings, a fitful stirring,
A cloud to the eastward snowy as curds.
Bare glassy slopes, where kids are tethered ;
Round valleys like nests all ferny-lined ;
Round hills, with fluttering tree-tops feathered,
Swell high in their freckled robes behind.
LOVE POEMS. 91
A rose-flush tender, a thrill, a quiver,
When golden gleams to the tree-tops glide ;
A flashing edge for the milk-white river.
The beck, a river —with still sleek tide.
Broad and white, and polished as silver,
On she goes under fruit-laden trees ;
Sunk in leafage cooeth the culver,
And 'plaineth of love's disloyalties.
Glitters the dew and shines the river,
Up comes the lily and dries her bell ;
But two are walking apart forever,
And wave their hands for a mute farewell.
A braver swell, a swifter sliding ;
The river hasteth, her banks recede :
Wing-like sails on her bosom gliding
Bear down the lily and drown the reed.
Stately prows are rising and bowing
(Shouts of mariners winnow the air),
And level sands for banks endowing
The tiny green ribbon that showed so fair.
While, O my heart! as white sails shiver
And crowds are passing, and banks stretch wide,
How hard to follow, with lips that quiver,
That moving speck on the far-off side !
92 LOVE POEMS.
Farther, farther — I see it —know it —
My eyes brim over, it melts away :
Only my heart to my heart shall show it
As I walk desolate day by day.
VIII.
And yet I know past all doubting, truly —
And knowledge greater than grief can dim —
I know, as he loved, he will love me duly —
Yea, better —e'en better than I love him.
And as I walk by the vast calm river,
The awful river so dread to see,
I say, " Thy breadth and thy depth forever
Are bridged by his thoughts that cross to me."
Jean Ingelow.
A BIRD-SONG.
It's a year almost that I have not seen her ;
Oh ! last summer, green things were greener,
Brambles fewer, the blue sky bluer.
It's well-nigh summer, for there's a swallow ;
Come one swallow, his mate will follow,
The bird-race quicken and wheel and thicken.
O happy swallow, whose mate will follow
O'er height, o'er hollow! I'd be a swallow
To build, this weather, our nest together.
Christina G. Rossetti.
LOVE POEMS. 93
When I think on the happy days
I spent wi' you, my dearie,
And now what lands between us lie,
How can I but be eerie!
How slow ye move, ye heavy hours,
As ye were wae and weary !
It was na sae ye glinted by
When I was wi' my dearie.
Anonymous.
TO ALTHEA, FROM PRISON.
When Love, with unconfined wings,
Hovers within my gates,
And my divine Althea brings
To whisper at the grates ;
When I lie tangled in her hair,
And fetter'd to her eye,
The birds that wanton in the air
Know no such liberty.
*****
Stone walls do not a prison make,
Nor iron bars a cage :
Minds innocent and quiet take
That for a hermitage :
If I have freedom in my love,
And in my soul am free,
Angels alone, that soar above,
Enjoy such liberty.
Richard Lovelace.
94 LOVE POEMS.
SONGS FROM THE PRINCESS.
Ask me no more : the moon may draw the sea ;
The cloud may stoop from heaven and take the
shape,
With fold to fold, of mountain or of cape :
But O too fond, when have I answer'd thee?
Ask me no more.
Ask me no more : what answer should I give?
I love not hollow cheek or faded eye :
Yet, O my friend, I will not have thee die!
Ask me no more, lest I should bid thee live ;
Ask me no more.
Ask me no more : thy fate and mine are seal'd :
I strove against the stream and all in vain :
Let the great river take me to the main :
No more, dear love, for at a touch I yield ;
Ask me no more.
As thro' the land at eve we went,
And pluck'd the ripen'd ears,
We fell out, my wife and I,
O we fell out I know not why,
And kiss'd again with tears.
And blessings on the falling out
That all the more endears,
When we fall out with those we love
And kiss again with tears!


LOVE POEMS. 95
.For when we came where lies the child
We lost in other years,
There above the little grave,
O there above the little grave,
We kiss'd again with tears.
" O Swallow, Swallow, flying, flying South,
Fly to her, and fall upon her gilded eaves,
And tell her, tell her, what I tell to thee.
" O tell her, Swallow, thou that knowest each,
That bright and fierce and fickle is the South,
And dark and true and tender is the North.
" O Swallow, Swallow, if I could follow, and light
Upon her lattice, I would pipe and trill,
And cheep and twitter twenty million loves.
" O were I thou that she might take me in,
And lay me on her bosom, and her heart
Would rock the snowy cradle till I died.
" Why lingereth she to clothe her heart with
love,
Delaying as the tender ash delays
To clothe herself, when all the woods are green ?
" O tell her, Swallow, that thy brood is flown :
Say to her, I do but wanton in the South,
But in the North long since my nest is made.
96 LOVE POEMS.
" O tell her, brief is life but love is long, •
And brief the sun of summer in the North,
And brief the moon of beauty in the South.
" O Swallow, flying from the golden woods.
Fly to her, and pipe and woo her, and make her
mine,
And tell her, tell her, that I follow thee."
Alfred Tennyson.
SONG OF THE VIOLET.
A humble flower long time I pined
Upon the solitary plain,
And trembled at the angry wind,
And shrunk before the bitter rain.
And oh ! 'twas in a blessed hour
A passing wanderer chanced to see,
And, pitying the lonely flower,
To stoop and gather me.
I fear no more the tempest rude,
On dreary heath no more I pine,
But left my cheerless solitude,
To deck the breast of Caroline.
Alas ! our days are brief at best,
Nor long, I fear, will mine endure,
Though sheltered here upon a breast
So gentle and so pure.
LOVE POEMS. 97
It draws the fragrance from my leaves,
It robs me of my sweetest breath,
And every time it falls and heaves,
It warns me of my coming death.
But one I know would glad forego
All joys of life to be as I ;
An hour to rest on that sweet breast,
And then, contented, die.
William Makepeace Thackeray.
LOVE IN A LIFE.
Room after room,
I hunt the house through
We inhabit together.
Heart, fear nothing, for, heart, thou shalt find her,
Next time, herself ! — not the trouble behind her
Left in the curtain, the couch's perfume!
As she brushed it, the cornice-wreath blossomed
anew, —
Yon looking-glass gleamed at the wave of her
feather.
Yet the day wears,
And door succeeds door ;
I try the fresh fortune, —
Range the wide house from the wing to the centre.
Still the same chance! she goes out as I enter.
Spend my whole day in the quest, —who cares?
But 'tis twilight, you see, —with such suits to explore,
Such closets to search, such alcoves to importune !
Robert Browning.
98 LOVE POEMS.
LOVE.
Love is not made of kisses, or of sighs,
Of clinging hands, or of the sorceries
And subtle witchcrafts of alluring eyes.
Love is not made of broken whispers ; no!
Nor of the blushing cheek, whose answering glow
Tells that the ear has heard the accents low.
Love is not made of tears, nor yet of smiles,
Of quivering lips, or of enticing wiles :
Love is not tempted ; he himself beguiles.
This is Love's language, but this is not Love.
If we know aught of Love, how shall we dare
To say that this is Love, when well aware
That these are common things, and Love is rare?
As separate streams may, blending, ever roll
In course united, so, of soul to soul,
Love is the union into one sweet whole.
As molten metals mingle ; as a chord
Swells sweet in harmony ; when Love is Lord,
Two hearts are one, as letters form a word.
One heart, one mind, one soul, and one desire,
A kindred fancy, and a sister fire
Of thought and passion; these can Love inspire.
This makes a heaven of earth ; for this is Love.
Chambers' Journal.
LOVE .POEMS. 99
LIFE IN A LOVE.
Escape me ?
Never —
Beloved !
While I am I, and you are you,
So long as the world contains us both,
Me the loving and you the loth,
While the one eludes, must the other pursue.
My life is a fault at last, I fear :
It seems too much like a fate, indeed!
Though I do my best I shall scarce succeed.
But what if I fail of my purpose here ?
It is but to keep the nerves at strain,
To dry one's eyes and laugh at a fall,
And baffled, get up and begin again, —
So the chase takes up one's life, that's all.
While, look but once from your farthest bound
At me so deep in the dust and dark,
No sooner the old hope goes to ground
Than a new one, straight to the self-same mark,
I shape me —
Ever Removed! Robert Browning.
NOT OURS THE VOWS.
Not ours the vows of such as plight
Their troth in sunny weather,
While leaves are green, and skies are bright,
To walk on flowers together.
100 LOVE POEMS.
But we have loved as those who tread
The thorny path of sorrow,
With clouds above, and cause to dread
Yet deeper gloom to-morrow.
That thorny path, those stormy skies,
Have drawn our spirits nearer,
And rendered us, by sorrow's ties,
Each to the other dearer.
Love, born in hours of joy and mirth,
With mirth and joy may perish ;
That to which darker hours gave birth
Still more and more we cherish.
It looks beyond the clouds of time,
And through death's shadowy portal,
Made by adversity sublime,
By faith and hope immortal.
Bernard Barton.
FOR THE FUTURE.
I wonder did you ever count
The value of one human fate ;
Or sum the infinite amount
Of one heart's treasures, and the weight
Of Life's one venture, and the whole concentrate
purpose of a soul.
LOVE POEMS. 101
And if you ever paused to think
That all this in your hands I laid
Without a fear : — did you not shrink
From such a burden ? half afraid,
Half-wishing that you could divide the risk, or cast
it all aside.
While Love has daily perils, such
As none foresee and none control ;
And hearts are strung so that one touch,
Careless or rough, may jar the whole,
You well might feel afraid to reign with absolute
power of joy and pain.
You well might fear —if Love's sole claim
Were to be happy ; but true Love
Takes joy as solace, not as aim,
And looks beyond and looks above ;
And sometimes through the bitterest strife first
learns to live her highest life.
Earth forges joy into a chain
Till fettered Love forgets its strength,
Its purpose, and its end ; —but Pain
Restores its heritage at length,
And bids Love rise again and be eternal, mighty,
pure, and free.
If then your future life should need
A strength my Love can only gain
Through suffering, or my heart be freed
102 LOVE POEMS.
Only by sorrow from some stain,
Then you shall give, and 1 will take, this Crown of
fire for Love's dear sake.
Adelaide Anne Procter.
COMFORT.
If there should come a time, as well there may,
When sudden tribulation smites thine heart,
And thou dost come to me for help, and stay,
And comfort — how shall I perform my part?
How shall I make my heart a resting-place,
A shelter safe for thee when terrors smite?
How shall I bring the sunshine to thy face,
And dry thy tears in bitter woe's despite?
How shall I win the strength to keep my voice
Steady and firm, although I hear thy sobs?
How shall I bid thy fainting soul rejoice,
Nor mar the counsel by mine own heart-throbs?
Love, my love teaches me a certain way,
So, if thy dark hour come, I am thy stay.
I must live higher, nearer to the reach
Of angels in their blessed trustfulness,
Learn their unselfishness, ere I can teach
Content to thee whom I would greatly bless.
Ah me! what woe were mine if thou shouldst come,
Troubled, but trusting, unto me for aid,
And I should meet thee powerless and dumb,
Willing to help thee, but confused, afraid!
LOVE POEMS. 103
It shall not happen thus, for I will rise,
God helping me, to higher life, and gain
Courage and strength to give thee counsel wise,
And deeper love to bless thee in thy pain.
Fear not, dear love, thy trial hour shall be
The dearest bond between my heart and thee.
All the Year Round.
SEVEN TIMES THREE. LOVE.
I leaned out of window, I smelt the white clover,
Dark, dark was the garden, I saw not the gate ;
" Now, if there be footsteps, he comes, my one
lover —
Hush, nightingale, hush! O, sweet nightingale,
wait
Till I listen and hear
If a step draweth near,
For my love he is late!
"The skies in the darkness stoop nearer and nearer,
A cluster of stars hangs like fruit in the tree,
The fall of the water comes sweeter, comes clearer :
To what art thou listening, and what dost thou
see?
Let the star-clusters grow,
Let the sweet waters flow,
And cross quickly to me.
104 LOVE POEMS.
"You night moths that hover where honey brims
over
From sycamore blossoms, or settle or sleep ;
You glowworms, shine out, and the pathway discover
To him that comes darkling along the rough steep.
Ah, my sailor, make haste,
For the time runs to waste,
And my love lieth deep —
" Too deep for swift telling ; and yet, my one lover,
I've conned thee an answer, it waits thee to-night."
By the sycamore passed he, and through the white
clover,
Then all the sweet speech I had fashioned took
flight;
But I'll love him more, more
Than e'er wife loved before,
Be the days dark or bright.
Jean Ingelow.
THE VIOLET.
The violet in her green-wood bower,
Where birchen boughs with hazels mingle,
May boast itself the fairest flower
In glen, or copse, or forest dingle.
Though fair her gems of azure hue,
Beneath the dew-drop's weight reclining ;
I've seen an eye of lovelier blue,
More sweet through watery lustre shining.
LOVE POEMS. 105
The summer sun that dew shall dry,
Ere yet the day be passed its morrow ;
No longer in my false love's eye
Remained the tear of parting sorrow.
Sir Walter Scott.
SONG.
In Love, if Love be Love, if Love be ours,
Faith and unfaith can ne'er be equal powers :
Unfaith in aught is want of faith in all.
It is the little rift within the lute
That by and by will make the music mute,
And ever widening slowly silence all.
The little rift within the lover's lute,
Or little pitted speck in garnered fruit,
That rotting inward slowly moulders all.
It is not worth the keeping : let it go :
But shall it? answer, darling; answer, no.
And trust me not at all, or all in all.
Alfred Tennyson.
ONE WAY OF LOVE.
All June I bound the rose in sheaves,
Now, rose by rose, I strip the leaves
And strew them where Pauline may pass.
LOVE POEMS.
She will not turn aside? Alas!
Let them lie. Suppose they die?
The chance was they might take her eye.
II.
How many a month I strove to suit
These stubborn fingers to the lute!
To-day I venture all I know.
She will not hear my music? So!
Break the string ; fold music's wing :
Suppose Pauline had bade me sing!
in.
My whole life long I learned to love.
This hour my utmost art I prove
And speak my passion — heaven or hell ?
She will not give me heaven? 'Tis well!
Lose who may —I still can say,
Those who win heaven, blest are they!
Robert Browning.
SWITZERLAND.
I. MEETING.
Again I see my bliss at hand,
The town, the lake, are here ;
My Marguerite smiles upon the strand,
Unaltered with the year.
LOVE POEMS. 107
I know that graceful figure fair,
That cheek of languid hue ;
I know that soft, enkerchiefed hair,
And those sweet eyes of blue.
Again I spring to make my choice ;
Again in tones of ire
I hear a God's tremendous voice, —
" Be counselled, and retire."
Ye guiding Powers who join and part,
What would ye have with me ?
Ah, warn some more ambitious heart,
And let the peaceful be !
II. PARTING.
Ye storm-winds of autumn!
Who rush by, who shake
The window, and ruffle
The gleam-lighted lake ;
Who cross to the hill-side
Thin-sprinkled with farms,
Where the high woods strip sadly
Their yellowing arms, —
Ye are bound for the mountains!
Ah! with you let me go
Where your cold, distant barrier,
The vast range of snow,
Through the loose clouds lifts dimly
108 LOVE POEMS.
Its white peaks in air.
How deep is there stillness!
Ah! would I were there!
But on the stairs what voice is this I hear,
Buoyant as morning, and as morning clear?
Say, has some wet bird-haunted English lawn
Lent it the music of its trees at dawn ?
Or was it from some sun-flecked mountain brook
That the sweet voice its upland clearness took ?
Ah! it comes nearer —
Sweet notes, this way!
Hark! fast by the window
The rushing winds go,
To the ice-cumbered gorges,
The vast seas of snow!
There the torrents drive upward
Their rock-strangled hum ;
There the avalanche thunders
The hoarse torrent dumb.
—I come, O ye mountains!
Ye torrents, I come!
But who is this, by the half-opened door,
Whose figure casts a shadow on the floor?
The sweet blue eyes — the soft, ash-colored hair —
The cheeks that still their gentle paleness wear —
The lovely lips, with their arched smile that tells
The unconquered joy in which her spirit dwells —
Ah! they bend nearer —
Sweet lips, this way!
LOVE POEMS. 109
Hark! the wind rushes past us!
Ah! with that let me go
To the clear, waning hill-side,
Unspotted by snow,
There to watch, o'er the sunk vale,
The frore mountain wall,
Where the niched snow-bed sprays down
Its powdery fall.
There its dusky blue clusters
The aconite spreads ;
There the pines slope, the cloud-strips
Hung soft in their heads.
No life but, at moments,
The mountain bee's hum.
— I come, O ye mountains!
Ye pine-woods, I come!
Forgive me! forgive me!
Ah, Marguerite, fain
Would these arms reach to clasp thee!
But see! 'tis in vain.
In the void air, towards thee,
My stretched arms are cast ;
But a sea rolls between us, —
Our different past!
To the lips, ah! of others
Those lips have been prest,
And others, ere I was,
Were strained to that breast.
110 LOVE POEMS.
Far, far from each other
Our spirits have grown.
And what heart knows another?
Ah! who knows his own?
Blow, ye winds! lift me with you!
I come to the wild.
Fold closely, O Nature!
Thine arms round thy child.
To thee only God granted
A heart ever new, —
To all always open,
To all always true.
Ah ! calm me, restore me ;
And dry up my tears
On thy high mountain platforms,
Where morn first appears ;
Where the white mists, forever,
Are spread and upfurled, —
In the stir of the forces
Whence issued the world.
III. A FAREWELL.
My horse's feet beside the lake,
Where sweet the unbroken moonbeams lay,
Sent echoes through the night to wake
Each glistening strand, each heath-fringed bay.
LOVE POEMS. Ill
The poplar avenue was passed,
And the roofed bridge that spans the stream ;
Up the steep street I hurried fast,
Led by thy taper's starlike beam.
I came! I saw thee rise! the blood
Poured flushing to thy languid cheek.
Locked in each other's arms we stood,
In tears, with hearts too full to speak.
Days flew ; ah, soon I could discern
A trouble in thine altered air!
Thy hand lay languidly in mine,
Thy cheek was grave, thy speech grew rare.
I blame thee not! This heart, I know,
To be long loved was never framed ;
For something in its depths doth glow
Too strange, too restless, too untamed.
And women, —things that live and move
Mined by the fever of the soul, —
They seek to find in those they love
Stern strength, and promise of control.
They ask not kindness, gentle ways ;
These they themselves have tried and known :
They ask a soul which never sways
With the blind gusts that shake their own.
112 LOVE POEMS.
I too have felt the load I bore
In a too strong emotion's sway ;
I too have wished, no woman more,
This starting, feverish heart away.
I too have longed for trenchant force.
And will like a dividing spear ;
Have praised the keen, unscrupulous course,
Which knows no doubt, which feels no fear.
But in the world I learnt, what there
Thou too will surely one day prove, —
That will, that energy, though rare,
Are yet far, far less rare than love.
Go, then ! till time and fate impress
This truth on thee, be mine no more!
They will! for thou, I feel, not less
Than I, was destined to this lore.
We school our manners, act our parts ;
But He, who sees us through and through,
Knows that the bent of both our hearts
Was to be gentle, tranquil, true.
And though we wear out life, alas!
Distracted as a homeless wind,
In beating where we must not pass,
In seeking what we shall not find ;
LOVE POEMS. 113
Yet we shall one day gain, life past,
Clear prospect o'er our being's whole ;
Shall see ourselves, and learn at last
Our true affinities of soul.
We shall not then deny a course
To every thought the mass ignore ;
We shall not then call hardness force,
Nor lightness wisdom any more.
Then, in the eternal Father's smile,
Our soothed, encouraged souls will dare
To seem as free from pride and guile,
As good, as generous, as they are.
Then we shall know our friends! Though much
Will have been lost, — the help in strife,
The thousand sweet, still joys of such
As hand in hand face earthly life, —
Though these be lost, there will be yet
A sympathy august and pure ;
Ennobled by a vast regret,
And by contrition sealed thrice sure.
And we, whose ways were unlike here,
May then more neighboring courses ply ;
May to each other be brought near,
And greet across infinity.
114 LOVE POEMS.
How sweet, unreached by earthly jars,
My sister! to maintain with thee
The hush among the shining stars,
The calm upon the moonlit sea!
How sweet to feel, on the boon air,
All our unquiet pulses cease !
To feel that nothing can impair
The gentleness, the thirst for peace, —
The gentleness too rudely hurled
On this wild earth of hate and fear ;
The thirst for peace, a raving world
Would never let us satiate here.
IV. ISOLATION. TO MARGUERITE.
We were apart : yet, day by day,
I bade my heart more constant be.
I bade it keep the world away,
And grow a home for only thee ;
Nor feared but thy love likewise grew,
Like mine, each day, more tried, more true.
The fault was grave! I might have known,
What far too soon, alas! I learned, —
The heart can bind itself alone,
And faith may oft be unreturned.
Self-swayed our feelings ebb and swell.
Thou lov'st no more. Farewell! Farewell!
LOVE POEMS. 115
Farewell! —And thou, thou lonely heart,
Which never yet without remorse
Even for a moment didst depart
From thy remote and sphered course
To haunt the place where passions reign, —
Back to thy solitude again !
Back ! with the conscious thrill of shame
Which Luna felt, that summer-night,
Flash through her pure immortal frame,
When she forsook the starry height
To hang o'er Endymion's sleep
Upon the pine-grown Latmian steep.
Yet she, chaste queen, had never proved
How vain a thing is mortal love,
Wandering in heaven, far removed ;
But thou hast long had place to prove
This truth, —to prove, and make thine own:
" Thou hast been, shalt be, art, alone."
• Or, if not quite alone, yet they
Which touch thee are unmating things, —
Ocean and clouds and night and day ;
Lorn autumns and triumphant springs ;
And life, and others' joy and pain,
And love, if love, of happier men.
Of happier men ; for they, at least,
Have dreamed two human hearts might blend
In one, and were through faith released
116 LOVE POEMS.
From isolation without end
Prolonged ; nor knew, although not less
Alone than thou, their loneliness.
V. TO MARGUERITE. CONTINUED.
Yes ! in the sea of life enisled,
With echoing straits between us thrown,
Dotting the shoreless watery wild,
We mortal millions live alone.
The islands feel the enclasping flow,
And then their endless bounds they know.
But when the moon their hollows lights,
And they are swept by balms of spring,
And in their glens, on starry nights,
The nightingales divinely sing ;
And lovely notes, from shore to shore,
Across the sounds and channels pour, —
Oh ! then a longing like despair
Is to their farthest caverns sent ;
For surely once, they feel, we were
Parts of a single continent!
Now round us spreads the watery plain :
Oh, might our marges meet again!
Who ordered that their longing's fire
Should be, as soon as kindled, cooled?
Who renders vain their deep desire ? —
A God, a God their severance ruled!
And bade betwixt their shores to be
The unplumbed, salt, estranging sea.
LOVE POEMS. 117
VI. ABSENCE.
In this fair stranger's eyes of gray,
Thine eyes, my love ! I see.
I shiver ; for the passing day
Had borne me far from thee.
This is the curse of life ! that not
A nobler, calmer train
Of wiser thoughts and feelings blot
Our passions from our brain ;
But each day brings its petty dust,
Our soon-choked souls to fill ;
And we forget because we must,
And not because we will.
I struggle towards the light ; and ye,
Once-longed-for storms of love!
If with the light ye cannot be,
I bear that ye remove.
I struggle towards the light ; but oh,
While yet the night is chill,
Upon time's barren, stormy flow,
Stay with me, Marguerite, still!
VII. THE TERRACE AT BERNE.
(Composed ten years after the preceding.)
Ten years ! and to my waking eye
Once more the roofs of Berne appear ;
The rocky banks, the terrace high,
The stream! and do I linger here?
118 LOVE POEMS.
The clouds are on the Oberland,
The Jungfrau snows look faint and far ;
But bright are those green fields at hand,
And through those fields comes down the Aar,
And from the blue twin-lakes it comes,
Flows by the town, the churchyard fair ;
And 'neath the garden-walk it hums,
The house ! and is my Marguerite there ?
Ah ! shall I see thee, while a flush
Of startled pleasure floods thy brow,
Quick through the oleanders brush,
And clap thy hands, and cry, '7« thou!
Or hast thou long since wandered back,
Daughter of France ! to France, thy home ;
And flitted down the flowery track
Where feet like thine too lightly come ?
Doth riotous laughter now replace
Thy smile, and rouge, with stony glare,
Thy cheek's soft hue, and fluttering lace
The kerchief that inwound thy hair?
Or is it over? art thou dead? —
Dead! —and no warning shiver ran
Across my heart, to say thy thread
Of life was cut, and closed thy span!
LOVE POEMS. 119
Could from earth's ways that figure slight
Be lost, and I not feel 'twas so ?
Of that fresh voice the gay delight
Fail from earth's air, and I not know?
Or shall I find thee still, but changed,
But not the Marguerite of thy prime ?
With all thy being re-arranged, —
Passed through the crucible of time ;
With spirit vanished, beauty waned,
And hardly yet a glance, a tone,
A gesture — anything — retained
Of all that was my Marguerite's own?
I will not know! For wherefore try,
To things by mortal course that live,
A shadowy durability,
For which they were not meant, to give ?
Like driftwood spars, which meet and pass
Upon the boundless ocean-plain,
So on the sea of life, alas!
Man meets man, — meets, and quits again.
I knew it when my life was young ;
I feel it still now youth is o'er.
—The mists are on the mountain hung,
And Marguerite I shall see no more.
Matthew Arnold.
120 LOVE POEMS.
EVELYN HOPE.
i.
Beautiful Evelyn Hope is dead!
Sit and watch by her side an hour.
That is her book-shelf, this her bed ;
She plucked that piece of geranium-flower,
Beginning to die too, in the glass ;
Little has yet been changed, I think :
The shutters are shut, no light may pass
Save two long rays through the hinge's chink.
II.
Sixteen years old when she died!
Perhaps she had scarcely heard my name ;
It was not her time to love ; beside,
Her life had many a hope and aim,
Duties enough and little cares,
And now was quiet, now astir,
Till God's hand beckoned unawares, —
And the sweet white brow is all of her.
in.
Is it too late then, Evelyn Hope?
What, your soul was pure and true,
The good stars met in your horoscope,
Made you of spirit, fire, and dew —
And just because I was thrice as old,
And our paths in the world diverged so wide,
Each was naught to each, must I be told?
We were fellow mortals, naught beside ?
LOVE POEMS. 121
IV.
No, indeed! for God above
Is great to grant, as mighty to make,
And creates the love to reward the love :
1 claim you still, for my own love's sake!
Delayed it may be for more lives yet,
Through worlds I shall traverse, not a few :
Much is to learn, much to forget
Ere the time be come for taking you.
But the time will come, — at last it will,
When, Evelyn Hope, what meant (I shall say)
In the lower earth, in the years long still,
That body and soul so pure and gay ?
Why your hair was amber, I shall divine,
And your mouth of your own geranium's red —
And what you would do with me, in fine,
In the new life come in the old one's stead.
I have lived (I shall say) so much since then,
Given up myself so many times,
Gained me the gains of various men,
Ransacked the ages, spoiled the climes ;
Yet one thing, one, in my soul's full scope,
Either I missed or itself missed me :
And I want and find you, Evelyn Hope!
What is the issue? let us see!
122 LOVE POEMS.
VII.
I loved you, Evelyn, all the while!
My heart seemed full as it could hold ;
There was place and to spare for the frank young
smile, And the red young mouth, and the hair's young
gold.
So hush, — I will give you this leaf to keep :
See, I shut it inside the sweet cold hand!
There, that is our secret : go to sleep !
You will wake, and remember, and understand. Robert Browning.
SONG.
Oh, say not, my love, with that mortified air,
That your spring-time of pleasure is flown,
Nor bid me to maids that are younger repair,
For those raptures that still are thine own.
Though April his temples may wreathe with the
vine,
Its tendrils in infancy curled,
'Tis the ardor of August matures us the wine,
Whose life-blood enlivens the world.
Though thy form, that was fashioned as light as a
fay's,
Has assumed a proportion more round,
LOVE POEMS. 123
And thy glance, that was bright as a falcon's at
gaze,
Looks soberly now on the ground, —
Enough, after absence to meet me again,
Thy steps still with ecstasy move ;
Enough, that those dear sober glances retain
For me the kind language of love.
Sir Walter Scott.
WISTERIA.
How tenderly the twilight falls
About our dear home's flowery walls,
Upon the garden bowers,
The breeze sighs over beds of bloom,
My darling, leave the dusky room,
Come out among the flowers.
Come forth, my wife, and stand with me,
Beneath our favorite chestnut-tree —
The glory of our lawn —
Look up, dear heart, in skies afar,
How softly beams the evening star —
The garish sun is gone.
How clearly from the coppice floats
The brown bird's strain — its magic notes
Of joy and sorrow blent.
How sweetly from the southern wall
Delightsome odors round us fall,
The rich wisteria's scent.
124 LOVE POEMS.
See, darling, in this tender gloom
The clusters of its purple bloom
Peep out amid the green :
A comely Summer robe it weaves
Of sturdy twigs and tender leaves,
With splendid blooms between.
How rich and full a life must beat
In its green branches! fair and sweet
It flowered in the Spring ;
And yet, ere Summer days are done,
It spreadeth to the Summer sun
A second blossoming.
It seemeth unto us a type
Of love, Spring-born, but Summer-ripe,
Full-hearted love like ours,
That sweetly smiled on life's young Spring,
Yet hath its fuller blossoming
In these maturer hours.
Our lives were like the Spring-time boughs
Of this old tree, which wreaths our house
With purple twice a year,
No leafage green of worldly praise,
Or worldly wealth made glad our days,
But lowly love was dear!
Ah, darling! on this Summer night
Our hearts brimful with deep delight,
We bless God as we stand
LOVE POEMS. 125
Beneath his arch of twilight sky
At rest, too glad to smile or sigh,
The happiest in the land.
Our tree of life is strong and full
Of leafage verdant, beautiful,
With blossoms in their prime,
For love, like fair wisteria flowers,
Brings, with full hands, to us and ours
A second blossom-time.
All the Year Round.
SONNET.
Yes! hope may with my strong desire keep pace,
And I be undeluded, unbetrayed ;
For if of our affections none find grace
In sight of Heaven, then, wherefore hath God made
The world which we inhabit? Better plea
Love cannot have than that in loving thee
Glory to that eternal peace is paid,
Who such divinity to thee imparts
As hallows and makes pure all gentle hearts.
His hope is treacherous only whose love dies
With beauty, which is varying every hour ;
But, in chaste hearts, uninfluenced by the power
Of outward change, there blooms a deathless flower,
That breathes on earth the air of Paradise.
Michael Angelo.
Translated by William Wordsworth.
126 LOVE POEMS.
MARRIED LOVERS.
Come away, the clouds are high,
Put the flashing needles by.
Many days are not to spare,
Or to waste, my fairest fair!
All is ready. Come to-day,
For the nightingale her lay,
When she findeth that the whole
Of her love, and all her soul,
Cannot forth of her sweet throat,
Sobs the while she draws her breath,
And the bravery of her note
In a few days altereth.
Come, ere she despond, and see
In a silent ecstasy
Chestnuts heave for hours and hours
All the glory of their flowers
To the melting blue above,
That broods over them like love.
Leave the garden walls, where blow
Apple-blossoms pink, and low
Ordered beds of tulips fine.
Seek the blossoms made divine
With a scent that is their soul.
These are soulless. Bring the white
Of thy gown to bathe in light
Walls for narrow hearts. The whole
Earth is found, and air and sea,
Not too wide for thee and me.
LOVE POEMS. 127
Not too wide, and yet thy face
Gives the meaning of all space,
And thine eyes, with starbeams fraught ;
Hold the measure of all thought ;
For of them my soul besought,
And was shown a glimpse of thine —
A veiled vestal, with divine
Solace, in sweet love's despair,
For that life is brief as fair.
Who hath most, he yearneth most,
Sure, as seldom heretofore,
Somewhere of the gracious more.
Deepest joy the least shall boast,
Asking with new-opened eyes
The remainder ; that which lies
O, so fair! but not all conned —
O, so near! and yet beyond.
Come, and in the woodland sit,
Seem a wonted part of it.
Then, while moves the delicate air,
And the glories of thy hair
Little flickering sun-rays strike,
Let me see what thou art like ;
For great love enthralls me so,
That, in sooth, I scarcely know.
Show me, in a house all green,
Save for long gold wedges' sheen,
Where the flies, white sparks of fire,
Dart and hover and aspire,
And the leaves, air-stirred on high,
LOVE POEMS.
Feel such joy they needs must sigh,
And the untracked grass makes sweet
All fair flowers to touch thy feet,
And the bees about them hum.
All the world is waiting. Come !
Jean Ingelow.
HOW MANY TIMES.
How many times do I love thee, dear?
Tell me how many thoughts there be
In the atmosphere
Of a new-fall'n year,
Whose white and sable hours appear
The latest flake of Eternity ;
So many times do I love thee, dear.
How many times do I love, again?
Tell me how many beads there are
In a silver chain
Of the evening rain,
Unravelled from the tumbling main,
And threading the eye of a yellow star :
So many times do I love again. Thomas Lovell Beddoes.
JAMES LEE'S WIFE.
I.
Ah, Love, but a day,
And the world has changed!
LOVE POEMS. 129
The sun's away,
And the bird estranged ;
The wind has dropped,
And the sky's deranged :
Summer has stopped.
Look in my eyes I
Wilt thou change too ?
Should I fear surprise ?
Shall I find aught new
In the old and dear,
In the good and true,
With the changing year?
III. Thou art a man,
But I am thy love.
For the lake, its swan ;
For the dell, its dove ;
And for thee — (oh, haste!)
Me to bend above, Me, to hold embraced.
AMONG THE ROCKS.
I.
Oh, good gigantic smile o' the brown old earth,
This autumn morning! How he sets his bones
To bask i' the sun, and thrusts out knees and feet
130 LOVE POEMS.
For the ripple to run over in its mirth ;
Listening the while, where on the heap of stones
The white breast of the sea-lark twitters sweet.
ii.
That is the doctrine, simple, ancient, true ;
Such is life's trial, as old earth smiles and knows.
If you loved only what were worth your love,
Love were clear gain, and wholly well for you :
Make the low nature better by your throes!
Give earth yourself, go up for gain above!
ALONG THE BEACH.
I.
I will be quiet and talk with you,
And reason why you are wrong.
You wanted my love — is that much true ?
And so I did love, so I do :
What has come of it all along?
II.
I took you — how could I otherwise ?
For a world to me, and more ;
For all, love greatens and glorifies
Till God's a-glow, to the loving eyes,
In what was mere earth before.
LOVE POEMS. 131
III.
Yes, earth —yes, mere ignoble earth!
Now do I misstate, mistake?
Do I wrong your weakness and call it worth?
Expect all harvest, dread no dearth,
Seal my sense up for your sake ?
IV.
O Love, Love, no, Love! not so, indeed
You were just weak earth, I knew :
With much in you waste, with many a weed,
And plenty of passions run to seed,
But a little good grain too.
And such as you were, I took you for mine :
Did not you find me yours,
To watch the olive and wait the vine,
And wonder when rivers of oil and wine
Would flow, as the Book assures ?
VI.
Well, and if none of these good things came,
What did the failure prove?
The man was my whole world, all the same,
With his flowers to praise or his weeds to blame,
And, either or both, to love.
132 LOVE POEMS.
VII.
Yet this turns now to a fault — there! there!
That I do love, watch too long,
And wait too well, and weary and wear ;
And 'tis all an old story, and my despair
Fit subject for some new song :
VIII.
" How the light, light love, he has wings to fly
At suspicion of a bond :
My wisdom has bidden your pleasure good-by,
Which will turn up next in a laughing eye,
And why should you look beyond? "
Robert Browning.
THE POET'S BRIDAL-DAY SONG.
O, mv love's like the steadfast sun,
Or streams that deepen as they run ;
Nor hoary hairs, nor forty years,
Nor moments between sighs and tears,
Nor nights of thought, nor days of pain,
Nor dreams of glory dreamed in vain.
Nor mirth, nor sweetest song that flows
To sober joys and soften woes,
Can make my heart or fancy flee
One moment, my sweet wife, from thee.
Even while I muse, I see thee sit
In maiden bloom and matron wit;
LOVE POEMS.
Fair, gentle, as when first I sued,
Ye seem, but of sedater mood ;
Yet my heart leaps as fond for thee
As when, beneath Arbigland tree,
We stayed and wooed, and thought the moon
Set on the sea an hour too soon ;
Or lingered 'mid the falling dew,
When looks were fond and words were few.
Though I see smiling at thy feet,
Five sons and a fair daughter sweet,
And time and care and birthtime woes
Have dimmed thine eye and touched thy rose
To thee, and thoughts of thee, belong
Whate'er charms me in tale or song,
When words descend like dews, unsought,
With gleams of deep, enthusiast thought,
And Fancy in her heaven flies free,
They come, my love, they come from thee.
O, when more thought we gave, of old,
To silver, than some give to gold,
'Twas sweet to sit and ponder o'er
How we should deck our humble bower ;
'Twas sweet to pull, in hope, with thee,
The golden fruit of Fortune's tree ;
And sweeter still to choose and twine
A garland for that brow of time,
A song-wreath which may grace my Jean,
While rivers flow, and woods grow green.
134 LOVE POEMS.
At times there come, as come there ought,
Grave moments of sedater thought,
When Fortune frowns, nor lends our night
One gleam of her inconstant light ;
And Hope, that decks the peasants' bower,
Shines like a rainbow through the shower,
0 then I see, while seated nigh,
A mother's heart shine in thine eye,
And proud resolve and purpose meek
Speak of thee more than words can speak.
1 think this wedded wife of mine,
The best of all that's not divine. Allan Cunningham.
MY LADY SINGING.
She whom this heart must ever hold most dear
(This heart in happy bondage held so long)
Began to sing. At first a gentle fear
Rosied her countenance — for she's young,
And he who loves her most of all was near ;
But when at last her voice grew full and strong
O, from their ambush sweet, how rich and clear
Bubbled the notes abroad — a rapturous throng!
Her little hands were sometimes flung apart,
And sometimes palm to palm together prest,
Whilst wave-like blushes, rising from her breast
Kept time with that aerial melody,
As muses to the sight! — I standing nigh,
Received the falling fountain in my heart.
Audrey De Vere.
LOVE POEMS. 135
MADRIGAL.
As I saw fair Chloris walk alone,
The feathered rain came softly down,
As Jove descending from his tower
To court her in a silver shower,
The wanton snow flew to her breast
As little birds into their nest ;
But, overcome with whiteness there,
For grief dissolved into a tear ;
Thence falling on her garment's hem,
To deck her, froze into a gem.
Anonymous.
YORK AND LANCASTER.
If this fair rose offend thy sight,
Placed in thy bosom bare,
'Twill blush to find itself less white,
And turn Lancastrian there.
But if thy ruby lip it spy,
As kiss it thou mayst deign,
With envy pale 'twill lose its dye,
And Yorkish turn again.
Anonymous.
136 LOVE POEMS.
JEANIE MORRISON.
I've wandered east, I've wandered west,
Through mony a weary way ;
But never, never can forget
The luve o' life's young day !
The fire that's blawn on Beltane e'en
May weel be black gin yule ;
But blacker fa' awaits the heart
Where first fond luve grows cule.
0 dear, dear Jeanie Morrison,
The thochts o' bygane years
Still fling their shadows ower my path,
And blind my een wi' tears :
They blind my een wi' saut, saut tears,
And sair and sick I pine,
As memory idly summons up
The blithe blinks o' lang syne.
'Twas then we luvit ilk ither weel,
'Twas then we twa did part ;
Sweet time, — sad time ! twa bairns at scule,
Twa bairns, and but ae heart!
'Twas then we sat on ae laigh bink,
To leir ilk ither lear ;
And tones and looks and smiles were shed,
Remembered evermair.
1 wonder Jeanie, aften yet,
When sitting on that bink,
LOVE POEMS. 137
Cheek touchin' cheek, loof locked in loof,
What our wee heads could think.
When baith bent doun ower ae braid page,
Wi' ae buik on our knee,
Thy lips were on thy lesson, but
My lesson was in thee.
O, mind ye how we hung our heads,
How cheeks brent red wi' shame,
Whene'er the scule-weans laughin' said,
We cleeked thegither hame ?
And mind ye o' the Saturdays
(The scule then skail't at noon,)
When we ran off to speel the braes, —
The broomy braes o' June?
My head rins round and round about,
My heart flows like a sea,
As one by one the thochts rush back
O' Scule-time and o' thee.
O mornin' life! O mornin' luve!
O lichtsome days and lang,
When hinnied hopes around our hearts
Like simmer blossoms sprang!
O, mind ye, luve, how aft we left
The deavin' dinsome town,
To wander by the green burnside,
And hear its waters croon ?
The simmer leaves hung ower our heads,
The flowers burst round our feet,
138 LOVE POEMS.
And in the gloamin' o' the wood
The throssil whusslit sweet ;
The throssil whusslit in the wood,
The burn sang to the trees,
And we with Nature's heart in tune,
Concerted harmonies ;
And on the knowe abune the burn,
For hours thegither sat
Yon the silentness o' joy, till baith
Wi' very gladness grat.
Ay, ay, dear Jeanie Morrison,
Tears twinkled down your cheek
Like dew-beads on a rose, yet nane
Had ony power to speak!
That was a time, a blessed time,
When hearts were fresh and young,
When freely gushed all feelings forth,
Unsyllabled, — unsung!
I marvel, Jeanie Morrison,
Gin I hae been to thee
As closely twined wi' earliest thochts,
As ye hae been to me ?
O, tell me gin their music fills
Thine ear as it does mine!
O, say gin e'er your heart grows grit
Wi' dreamings o' lang syne?
LOVE POEMS. 139
I've wandered east, I've wandered west,
I've born a weary lot ;
But in my wanderings, far or near,
Ye never were forgot.
The fount that first burst frae this heart
Still travels on its way ;
And channels deeper, as it rins,
The luve o' life's young day.
O dear, dear Jeanie Morrison,
Since we were sindered young,
I've never seen your face, nor heard
The music o' your tongue ;
But I could hug all wretchedness,
And happy could I die,
Did I but ken your heart still dreamed
O' bygane days and me! William Motherwell.
I MET WI' HER I LUVED YESTREEN.
I met wi' her I luved yestreen,
I met her wi' a look o' sorrow ;
My leave I took o' her for aye,
A weddit bride she'll be the morrow!
She durst na gie ae smile to me,
Nor drap ae word o' kindly feelin',
Yet down her cheeks the bitter tears,
In monie a pearly bead, were stealin'.
140 LOVE POEMS.
I could na my lost luve upbraid,
Altho' my dearest hopes were blighted,
I could na say —" ye're fause to me ! " —
Tho' to anither she was plighted.
Like suthfast friens whom death divides,
In Heaven to meet, we silent parted ;
Nae voice had we our griefs to speak,
We felt sae lone and broken-hearted.
I'll hie me frae my native Ian',
Far frae thy blythesome banks o' Yarrow!
Wae's me, I canna bide to see
My winsume luve anither's marrow!
I'll hie me to a distant Ian',
Wi' downcast ee and life-sick bosom,
A weary waste the warld's to me,
Sin' I hae lost that bonnie blossom.
William Motherwell.
A WOMAN'S QUESTION.
Before I trust my Fate to thee,
Or place my hand in thine,
Before I let thy Future give
Color and form to mine,
Before I peril all for thee, question thy soul to-night
for me.
LOVE POEMS. 141
I break all slighter bonds, nor feel
A shadow of regret :
Is there one link within the Past
That holds thy spirit yet?
Or is thy Faith as clear and free as that which I can
pledge to thee ?
Does there within thy dimmest dreams
A possible future shine,
Wherein thy life could henceforth breathe,
Untouched, unshared by mine?
If so, at any pain or cost, O, tell me before all is lost.
Look deeper still. If thou canst feel
Within thy inmost soul,
That thou hast kept a portion back,
While I have staked the whole ;
Let no false pity spare the blow, but in true mercy
tell me so.
Is there within thy heart a need
That mine cannot fulfil ?
One chord that any other hand
Could better wake or still?
Speak now — lest at some future day my whole life
wither and decay.
Lives there within thy nature hid
The demon-spirit Change,
Shedding a passing glory still
On all things new and strange ? —
It may not be thy fault alone —but shield my heart
against thy own.
142 LOVE POEMS.
Couldst thou withdraw thy hand one day
And answer to my claim,
That Fate, and that to-day's mistake —
Not thou — had been to blame ?
Some soothe their conscience thus ; but thou wilt
surely warn and save me now.
Nay, answer not, — I dare not hear,
The words would come too late ;
Yet I would spare thee all remorse,
So, comfort thee, my Fate —
Whatever on my heart may fall —remember, I would
risk it all !
Adelaide Anne Procter.
A WOMAN'S ANSWER.
I will not let you say a Woman's part
Must be to give exclave love alone ;
Dearest, although I love you so, my heart
Answers a thousand claims beside your own.
I love —what do I not love? earth and air
Find space within my heart, and myriad things
You would not deign to heed are cherished there,
And vibrate on its very inmost strings.
I love the Summer with her ebb and flow
Of light, and warmth, and music, that have nurst
Her tender buds to blossoms . . . and you know
It was in summer that I saw you first.
SONGS OF SPRING.
i
LOVE POEMS. 143
I love the Winter dearly, too, . . . but then
I owe it so much ; on a winter's day,
Bleak, cold, and stormy, you returned again,
When you had been those weary months away.
I love the Stars like friends ; so many nights
I gazed at them, when you were far from me,
Till I grew blind with tears . . . those far-off lights
Could watch you, whom I longed in vain to see.
I love the Flowers ; happy hours lie
Shut up within their petals close and fast :
You have forgotten, dear; but they and I
Keep every fragment of the golden Past.
I love, too, to be loved ; all loving praise
Seems like a crown upon my Life, —to make
It better worth the giving, and to raise
Still nearer to your own the heart you take.
I love all good and noble souls ; — I heard
One speak of you but lately, and for days,
Only to think of it, my soul was stirred
In the tender memory of such generous praise.
I love all those who love you ; all who owe
Comfort to you : and I can find regret
Even for those poorer hearts who once could know
And once could love you, and can now forget.
144 .LOVE POEMS.
Well, is my heart so narrow, — I, who spare
Love for all these ? Do I not even hold
My favorite books in special tender care,
And prize them as a miser does his gold?
The Poets that you used to read to me
While summer twilights faded in the sky ;
But most of all I think Aurora Leigh,
Because —because — do you remember why ?
Will you be jealous? Did you guess before
I loved so many things? Still you the best : —
Dearest, remember that I love you more,
O, more a thousand times, than all the rest !
Adelaide Anne Procter.
TRUE OR FALSE.
So you think you love me, do you?
Well, it may be so ;
But there are many ways of loving
I have learnt to know.
Many ways, and but one true way,
Which is very rare ;
And the counterfeits look brightest,
Though they will not wear.
Yet they ring, almost, quite truly,
Last (with care) for long ;
But in time must break, may shiver
At a touch of wrong :
LOVE POEMS. 145
Having seen what looked most real
Crumble into dust ;
Now I chose that test and trial
Should precede my trust.
I have seen a love demanding
Time and hope and tears,
Chaining all the past, exacting
Bonds from future years ;
Mind and heart, and joy and sorrow,
Claiming as its fee :
That was Love of Self, and never,
Never Love of me!
I have seen a love forgetting
All above, beyond,
Linking every dream and fancy
In a sweeter bond ;
Counting every hour worthless,
Which was cold or free : —
That, perhaps, was — Love of Pleasure,
But not Love of me!
I have seen a love whose patience
Never turned aside,
Full of tender, fond devices ;
Constant, even when tried ;
Smallest boons were held as victories,
Drops that swelled the sea :
That I think was — Love of Power,
But not Love of me!
LOVE POEMS.
I have seen a love disdaining
Ease and pride and fame, Burning even its own white pinions
Just to feed its flame :
Reigning thus, supreme, triumphant,
By the soul's decree ;
That was — Love of Love, I fancy,
But not Love of me !
I have heard —or dreamt, it may be —
What Love is when true :
How to test and how to try it,
Is the gift of few :
These few say (or did I dream it?)
That true Love abides In these very things, but always
Has a soul besides.
Lives among the false loves, knowing
Just their peace and strife ;
Bears the self-same look, but always
Has an inner life. Only a true heart can find it,
True as it is true, Only eyes as clear and tender
Look it through and through.
If it dies, it will not perish
By Time's slow decay, True Love only grows (they tell me)
Stronger, day by day :
LOVE POEMS. H7
Pain —has been its friend and comrade ;
Fate —it can defy ;
Only by its own sword, sometimes
Love can choose to die.
And its grave shall be more noble
And more sacred still,
Than a throne, where one less worthy
Reigns and rules at will.
Tell me then, do you dare offer
This true Love to me? . . .
Neither you nor I can answer ;
We will —wait and see!
Adelaide Anne Procter.
I SAW THEE WEEP.
I.
I saw thee weep —the big bright tear
Came o'er that eye of blue ;
And then methought it did appear
A violet dropping dew ;
I saw thee smile — the sapphire's blaze
Beside thee ceased to shine ;
It could not match the living rays
That fill'd that glance of thine.
As clouds from yonder sun receive
A deep and yellow die,
Which scarce the shade of coming eve
148 LOVE POEMS.
Can banish from the sky,
Those smiles unto the moodiest mind
Their own pure joy impart ;
Their sunshine leaves a glow behind
That lightens o'er the heart.
Lord Byron.
ORIGIN OF LOVE.
The " Origin of Love ! " — Ah, why
That cruel question ask of me,
When thou may'st read in many an eye
He starts to life on seeing thee?
And should'st thou seek his end to know :
My heart forebodes, my fears foresee,
He'll linger long in silent woe ;
But live — until I cease to be.
Lord Byron.
THE DREAM.
Our life is twofold ; Sleep hath its own world,
A boundary between the things misnamed
Death and existence : Sleep hath its own world,
And a wide realm of wild reality,
And dreams in their development have breath,
And tears, and tortures, and the touch of joy;
They leave a weight upon our waking thoughts,
They take a weight from off our waking toils,
LOVE POEMS. 149
They do divide our being ; they become
A portion of ourselves as of our time,
And look like heralds of eternity ;
They pass like spirits of the past, — they speak
Like sibyls of the future ; they have power
The tyranny of pleasure and of pain ;
They make us what we were not —what they will
And shake us with the vision that's gone by,
The dread of vanish'd shadows — Are they so ?
Is not the past all shadow ? What are they ?
Creations of the mind? —. The mind can make
Substance, and people planets of its own
With beings brighter than have Leen, and give
A breath to forms which can outlive all flesh.
I would recall a vision which I dream'd
Perchance in sleep —for in itself a thought,
A slumbering thought, is capable of years,
And curdles a long life into one hour.
ii.
I saw two beings in the hues of youth
Standing upon a hill, a gentle hill,
Green and of mild declivity, the last
As 'twere the cape of a long ridge of such,
Save that there was no sea to lave its base,
But a most living landscape, and the wave
Of woods and cornfields, and the abodes of men
Scatter'd at intervals, and wreathing smoke
Arising from such rustic roofs ; —the hill
Was crowned with a peculiar diadem
150 LOVE POEMS.
Of trees, in circular array, so fix'd,
Not by the sport of nature, but of man :
These two, a maiden and a youth, were there
Gazing — the one on all that was beneath
Fair as herself —but the boy gazed on her ;
And both were young, and one was beautiful :
And both were young — yet not alike in youth.
As the sweet moon on the horizon's verge,
The maid was on the eve of womanhood ;
The boy had fewer summers, but his heart
Had far outgrown his years, and to his eye
There was but one beloved face on earth,
And that was shining on him ; he had look'd
Upon it till it could not pass away ;
He had no breath, no being, but in hers ;
She was his voice ; he did not speak to her,
But trembled on her words ; she was his sight,
For his eye follow'd hers, and saw with hers.
Which color'd all his objects : —he had ceased
To live within himself; she was his life,
The ocean to the river of his thoughts,
Which terminated all : upon a tone.
A touch of hers, his blood would ebb and flow,
And his cheek change tempestuously — his heart
Unknowing of its cause of agony.
But she in these fond feelings had no share :
Her sighs were not for him ; to her he was Even as a brother — but no more ; 'twas much
For brotherless she was, save in the name
Her infant friendship had bestow'd on him ;
Herself the solitary scion left
LOVE POEMS. 151
Of a time-honor'd race. — It was a name
. Which pleased him, and yet pleased him not —and
why?
Time taught him a deep answer — when she loved
Another ; even now she loved another,
And on the summit of that hill she stood
Looking afar if yet her lover's steed
Kept pace with her expectancy, and flew.
in.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
There was an ancient mansion, and before
Its walls there was a steed caparison'd :
Within an antique Oratory stood
The Boy of whom I spake ; — he was alone,
And pale, and pacing to and fro : anon
He sate him down, and seized a pen, and traced
Words which I could not guess of; then he lean'd
His bow'd head on his hands, and shook as 'twere
With a convulsion — then arose again,
And with his teeth and quivering hands did tear
What he had written, but he shed no tears.
And he did calm himself, and fix his brow
Into a kind of quiet : as he paused,
The Lady of his love re-enter'd there ;
She was serene and smiling then, and yet
She knew she was by him beloved, —she knew,
For quickly comes such knowledge, that his heart
Was darken'd with her shadow, and she saw
That he was wretched, but she saw not all.
152 LOVE POEMS.
He rose, and with a cold and gentle grasp
He took her hand ; a moment o'er his face
A tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced, and then it faded, as it came ;
He dropp'd the hand he held, and with slow steps
Retired, but not as bidding her adieu,
For they did part with mutual smiles ; he pass'd
From out the massy gate of that old Hall,
And mounting on his steed he went his way ;
And ne'er repass'd that hoary threshold more.
IV.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The Boy was sprung to manhood : in the wilds
Of fiery climes he made himself a home,
And his Soul drank their sunbeams : he was girt
With strange and dusky aspects ; he was not
Himself like what he had been ; on the sea
And on the shore he was a wanderer ;
There was a mass of many images
Crowded like waves upon me, but he was
A part of all : and in the last he lay
Reposing from the noontide sultriness,
Couch'd among fallen columns, in the shade
Of ruin'd walls that had survived the names
Of those who rear'd them ; by his sleeping side
Stood camels grazing, and some goodly steeds
Were fasten'd near a fountain ; and a man
Clad in a flowing garb did watch the while,
While many of his tribe slumber'd around,
LOVE POEMS. 153
And they were canopied by the blue sky,
So cloudless, clear, and purely beautiful,
That God alone was to be seen in Heaven.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream,
The Lady of his love was wed with One
Who did not love her better : —in her home
A thousand leagues from his, — her native home,
She dwelt, begirt with growing Infancy,
Daughters and sons of Beauty, — but behold!
Upon her face there was the tint of grief,
The settled shadow of an inward strife,
And an unquiet drooping of the eye
As if its lid were charged with unshed tears.
What could her grief be ? —she had all she loved,
And he who had so loved her was not there
To trouble with bad hopes, or evil wish,
Or ill repress'd affliction, her pure thoughts.
What could her grief be ? — She had loved him
not,
Nor given him cause to deem himself beloved,
Nor could he be a part of that which prey'd
Upon her mind —a spectre of the past.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The Wanderer was return'd. — I saw him stand
Before an Altar —with a gentle bride ;
Her face was fair, but was not that which made
154 LOVE POEMS.
The Starlight of his Boyhood ; as he stood
Even at the altar, o'er his brow there came
The selfsame aspect, and the quivering shock
That in the antique Oratory shook
His bosom in its solitude ; and then —
As in that hour —a moment o'er his face
The tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced, —and then it faded as it came,
And he stood calm and quiet, and he spoke
The fitting vows, but heard not his own words,
And all things reel'd around him ; he could see
Not that which was, nor that which should have
been,
But the old mansion, and the accustom'd hall,
And the remember'd chambers, and the place,
The day, the hour, the sunshine, and the shade,
All things pertaining to that place and hour,
And her who was his destiny, came back
And thrust themselves between him and the light :
What business had they there at such a time?
VII.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The lady of his love ; — Oh! she was changed
As by the sickness of the soul ; her mind
Had wander'd from its dwelling, and her eyes
They had not their own lustre, but the look
Which is not of the earth ; she was become
The queen of a fantastic realm ; her thoughts
Were combinations of disjointed things ;
LOVE POEMS. 155
And forms impalpable and unperceived
Of others' sight familiar were to hers.
And this the world calls phrensy, but the wise
Have a far deeper madness, and the glance
Of melancholy is a fearful gift ;
What is it but the telescope of truth ?
Which strips the distance of its phantasies,
And brings life near in utter nakedness,
Making the cold reality too real!
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The Wanderer was alone as heretofore,
The beings which surrounded him were gone,
Or were at war with him ; he was a mark
For blight and desolation, compass'd round
With Hatred and Contention ; Pain was mix'd
In all which was served up to him, until
Like to the Pontic monarch of old days,
He fed on poisons, and they had no power,
But were a kind of nutriment, he lived
Through that which had been death to many men,
And made him friends of mountains : with the stars
And the quick Spirit of the Universe
He held his dialogues ; and they did teach
To him the magic of their mysteries ;
To him the book of Night was open'd wide
And voices from the deep abyss revealed
A marvel and a secret — Be it so.
156 LOVE POEMS.
IX.
My dream was past ; it had no future change.
It was of a strange order, that the doom
Of these two creatures should be thus traced out
Almost like a reality — the one
To end in madness —both in misery.
Lord Byron.
LOVE.
All thoughts, all passions, all delights,
Whatever stirs this mortal frame,
All are but ministers of Love,
And feed his sacred flame.
Oft in my waking dreams do I
Live o'er again that happy hour,
When midway on the mount I lay
Beside the ruin'd tower.
The moonshine stealing o'er the scene
Had blended with the lights of eve ;
And she was there, my hope, my joy,
My own dear Genevieve!
She lean'd against the arme'd man,
The statue of the arme'd knight ;
She stood and listen'd to my lay,
Amid the lingering light.
LOVE POEMS.
Few sorrows hath she of her own,
My hope! my joy! my Genevieve!
She loves me best, whene'er I sing
The songs that make her grieve.
I play'd a soft and doleful air,
I sang an old and moving story —
An old rude song, that suited well
That ruin wild and hoary.
She listen'd with a flitting blush,
With downcast eyes and modest grace ;
For well she knew, I could not choose
But gaze upon her face.
I told her of the Knight that wore
Upon his shield a burning brand ;
And that for ten long years he woo'd
The Lady of the Land.
I told her how he pined : and ah !
The deep, the low, the pleading tone
With which I sang another's love
Interpreted my own.
She listen'd with a flitting blush,
With downcast eyes, and modest grace ;
And she forgave me, that I gazed
Too fondly on her face.
158 LOVE POEMS.
But when I told the cruel scorn
That crazed that bold and lovely Knight,
And that he cross'd the mountain-woods,
Nor rested day nor night ;
That sometimes from the savage den,
And sometimes from the darksome shade,
And sometimes starting up at once
In green and sunny glade,
There came and look'd him in the face
An angel beautiful and bright ;
And that he knew it was a Fiend,
This miserable Knight!
And that unknowing what he did,
He leap'd amid a murderous band,
And saved from outrage worse than death
The Lady of the Land ;
And how she wept, and clasp'd his knees ;
And how she tended him in vain ;
And ever strove to expiate
The scorn that crazed his brain ;
And that she nursed him in a cave,
And how his madness went away,
When on the yellow forest-leaves
A dying man he lay ;
LOVE POEMS. 159
— His dying words — but when I reach'd
That tenderest strain of all the ditty,
My faltering voice and pausing harp
Disturbed her soul with pity!
All impulses of soul and sense
Had thrill'd my guileless Genevieve ;
The music and the doleful tale,
The rich and balmy eve ;
And hopes and fears that kindle hope,
An undistinguishable throng,
And gentle wishes long subdued,
Subdued and cherish'd long.
She wept with pity and delight,
She blush'd with love, and virgin shame ;
And like the murmur of a dream,
I heard her breathe my name.
Her bosom heaved — she stepp'd aside,
As conscious of my look she stept —
Then suddenly, with timorous eye,
She fled to me and wept.
She half enclosed me with her arms,
She press'd me with a meek embrace ;
And bending back her head, look'd up,
And gazed upon my face.
160 LOVE POEMS.
'Twas partly love, and partly fear,
And partly 'twas a bashful art
That I might rather feel than see
The swelling of her heart.
I calm'd her fears, and she was calm,
And told her love with virgin pride ;
And so I won my Genevieve,
My bright and beauteous Bride.
S. T. Coleridge.
ALL FOR LOVE.
O talk not to me of a name great in story ;
The days of our youth are the days of our glory ;
And the myrtle and ivy of sweet two-and-twenty
Are worth all your laurels, though ever so plenty.
What are garlands and crowns to the brow that is
wrinkled ?
'Tis but as a dead flower with May-dew besprinkled :
Then away with all such from the head that is
hoary —
What care I for the wreaths that can only give glory?
O Fame! —if I e'er took delight in thy praises,
'Twas less for the sake of thy high-sounding phrases,
Than to see the bright eyes of the dear one discover
She thought that I was not unworthy to love her.
LOVE POEMS. 161
There chiefly I sought thee, there only I found thee ;
Her glance was the best of the rays that surround
thee;
When it sparkled o'er aught that was bright in my
story,
I knew it was love, and I felt it was glory.
Lord Byron.
THE LOST LOVE.
She dwelt among the untrodden ways
Beside the springs of Dove ;
A maid whom there were none to praise,
And very few to love.
A violet by a mossy stone
Half-hidden from the eye!
— Fair as a star, when only one
Is shining in the sky.
She lived unknown, and few could know
When Lucy ceased to be ;
But she is in her grave, and O!
The difference to me!
William Wordsworth.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate :
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,
And summer's lease hath all too short a date :
162 LOVE POEMS.
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed ;
And every fair from fair sometime declines,
By chance or nature's changing course untrimmed ;
But thy eternal summer shall not fade
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st ;
Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st :
So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
William Shakespeare.
She is not fair to outward view
As many maidens be ;
Her loveliness I never knew
Until she smiled on me.
O then I saw her eye was bright,
A well of love, a spring of light.
But now her looks are coy and cold,
To mine they ne'er reply,
And yet I cease not to behold
The love-light in her eye :
Her very frowns are fairer far
Than smiles of other maidens are.
H. Coleridge.
Music, when soft voices die,
Vibrates in the^memory —
Odors, when sweet violets sicken,
Live within the sense they quicken.
LOVE POEMS. 163
Rose leaves, when the rose is dead,
Are heap'd for the beloved's bed ;
And so thy thoughts, when Thou art gone,
Love itself shall slumber on.
P. B. Shelley.
THE TRUE BEAUTY.
He that loves a rosy cheek
Or a coral lip admires,
Or from starlike eyes doth seek
Fuel to maintain his fires ;
As old Time makes these decay,
So his flames must waste away.
But a smooth and steadfast mind,
Gentle thoughts, and calm desires,
Hearts with equal love combined,
Kindle never-dying fires : —
Where these are not, I despise
Lovely cheeks or lips or eyes.
T. Carew.
TO DIANEME.
Sweet, be not proud of those two eyes
Which starlike sparkle in their skies ;
Nor be you proud, that you can see
All hearts your captives ; yours yet free :
164 LOVE POEMS.
Be you not proud of that rich hair
Which wantons with the lovesick air ;
Whenas that ruby which you wear,
Sunk from the tip of your soft ear,
Will last to be a precious stone
When all your world of beauty's gone.
R. Herrick.
Go, lovely Rose!
Tell her, that wastes her time and me,
That now she knows,
When I resemble her to thee,
How sweet and fair she seems to be.
Tell her that's young
And shuns to have her graces spied,
That hadst thou sprung
In deserts, where no men abide,
Thou must have uncommended died.
Small is the worth
Of beauty from the light retired :
Bid her come forth,
Suffer herself to be desired,
And not blush so to be admired.
Then die! that she
The common fate of all things rare
May read in thee :
How small a part of time they share
That are so wondrous sweet and fair!
E. Waller.
LOVE POEMS. 165
BLIND LOVE.
O me ! what eyes hath love put in my head
Which have no correspondence with true sight :
Or if they have, where is my judgment fled
That censures falsely what they see aright ?
If that be fair whereon my false eyes dote,
What means the world to say it is not so?
If it be not, then love doth well denote
Love's eye is not so true as all men's : No,
How can it! O how can love's eye be true,
That is so vex'd with watching and with tears?
No marvel then though I mistake my view :
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
O cunning Love! with tears thou keep'st me blind,
Lest eyes well-seeing thy foul faults should find!
William Shakespeare.
WHERE SHALL THE LOVER REST?
Where shall the lover rest
Whom the fates sever
From his true maiden's breast
Parted forever?
Where, through groves deep and high
Sounds the far billow,
166 LOVE POEMS.
Where early violets die
Under the willow.
Eleu loro
Soft shall be his pillow.
There, through the summer day
Cool streams are laving :
There, while the tempests sway,
Scarce are boughs waving ;
There thy rest shalt thou take,
Parted forever,
Never again to wake
Never, O never!
Eleu loro
Never, O never!
Where shall the traitor rest,
He, the deceiver,
Who could win maiden's breast,
Ruin, and leave her?
In the lost battle,
Borne down by the flying,
Where mingles war's rattle
With groans of the dying ;
Eleu loro
There shall he be lying.
Her wing shall the eagle flap
O'er the false-hearted ;
His warm blood the wolf shall lap
Ere life be parted :
LOVE POEMS. 167
Shame and dishonor sit
By his grave ever ;
Blessing shall hallow it
Never, O never!
Eleu loro
Never, O never!
Sir W. Scott.
One word is too often profaned
For me to profane it,
One feeling too falsely disdain'd
For thee to disdain it.
One hope is too like despair
For prudence to smother,
And Pity from thee more dear
Than that from another.
I can give not what men call love ;
But wilt thou accept not
The worship the heart lifts above
And the Heavens reject not :
The desire of the moth for the star,
Of the night for the morrow,
The devotion to something afar
From the sphere of our sorrow?
P. B. Shelley.
168 LOVE POEMS.
A BIRTHDAY.
My heart is like a singing bird
Whose nest is in a watered shoot ;
My heart is like an apple tree
Whose boughs are bent with thickest fruit ;
My heart is like a rainbow shell
That paddles in a halcyon sea —
My heart is gladder than all these,
Because my love is come to me.
Raise me a dais of silk and down,
Hang it with vair and purple dyes,
Carve it in doves, and pomegranates,
And peacocks with a hundred eyes ;
Work it in gold and silver grapes,
In leaves, and silver fleurs-de-lys,
Because the birthday of my life
Is come, my love is come to me.
Christina Geobgiana Rossetti.
FROM "THE WINTER'S TALE."
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak,
sweet,
I'd have you do it ever ; when you sing,
I'd have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so ; and, for the ordering of your affairs,
LOVE POEMS. 169
To sing them too : when you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that ; move still, still so,
And own no other function. Each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.
William Shakesfeare.
SONNETS FROM THE PORTUGUESE.
Go from me. Yet! feel that I shall stand
Henceforward in thy shadow. Nevermore
Alone upon the threshold of my door
Of individual life, I shall command
The uses of my soul, nor lift my hand
Serenely in the sunshine as before,
Without the sense of that which I forbore, . . .
Thy touch upon the palm. The widest land
Doom takes to part us, leaves thy heart in mine
With pulses that beat double. What I do
And what I dream include thee, as the wine
Must taste of its own grapes. And when I sue
God for myself, He hears that name of thine,
And sees within my eyes, the tears of two.
If thou must love me, let it be for nought
Except for love's sake only. Do not say
" I love her for her smile . . . her look . . . her way
Of speaking gently, ... for a trick of thought
170 LOVE POEMS.
That falls in well with mine, and certes brought
A sense of pleasant ease on such a day " —
For these things in themselves, Beloved, may
Be changed, or change for thee, — and love,
wrought,
May be unwrought so. Neither love me for
Thine own dear pity's wiping my cheeks dry, —
A creature might forget to weep, who bore
Thy comfort long, and lose thy love thereby!
But love me for love's sake, that evermore
Thou may'st love on, through love's eternity.
Beloved, my Beloved, when I think
That thou wast in the world a year ago,
What time I sate alone here in the snow
And saw no footprint, heard the silence sink
No moment at thy voice, . . . but, link by link,
Went counting all my chains, as if that so
They never could fall off at any blow
Struck by thy possible hand . . . why, thus I drink
Of life's great cup of wonder! Wonderful,
Never to feel thee thrill the day or night
With personal act or speech, — nor ever cull
Some prescience of thee with the blossoms white
Thou sawest growing! Atheists are as dull,
Who cannot guess God's presence out of sight.
Is it indeed so ? If I lay here dead,
Would'st thou miss any life in losing mine?
And would the sun for thee more coldly shine,
LOVE POEMS. 171
Because of grave-damps falling round my head ?
I marvelled, my Beloved, when I read
Thy thought so in the letter. I am thine —
But . . . so much to thee ? Can I pour thy wine
While my hands tremble? Then my soul, instead
Of dreams of death, resumes life's lower range.
Then, love me, Love! look on me . . . breathe on
me!
As brighter ladies do not count it strange,
For love, to give up acres and degree,
I yield the grave for thy sake, and exchange
My near sweet view of Heaven, for earth with thee!
Thou comest! all is said without a word.
I sit beneath thy looks, as children do
In the noon-sun, with souls that tremble through
Their happy eyelids from an unaverred
Yet prodigal inward joy. Behold, I erred
In that last doubt! and yet I cannot rue
The sin most, but the occasion . . . that we two
Should for a moment stand unministered
By a mutual presence. Ah, keep near and close,
Thou dovelike help! and, when my fears would rise,
With thy broad heart serenely interpose.
Brood down with thy divine sufficiencies
These thoughts which tremble when bereft of those,
Like callow birds left desert to the skies.
If I leave all for thee, wilt thou exchange
And be all to me? Shall I never miss
172 LOVE POEMS.
Home-talk and blessing and the common kiss
That comes to each in turn, nor count it strange,
When I look up, to drop on a new range
Of walls and floors . . . another home than this?
Nay, wilt thou fill that place by me which is
Filled by dead eyes too tender to know change?
That's hardest. If to conquer love, has tried,
To conquer grief, tries more ... as all things prove ;
For grief indeed is love and grief beside.
Alas I have grieved so I am hard to love.
Yet love me — wilt thou? Open thine heart wide,
And fold within, the wet wings of thy dove.
Because thou hast the power and own'st the grace
To look through and behind this mask of me,
(Against which years have beat thus blanchingly
With their rains,) and behold my soul's true face,
The dim and weary witness of life's race ! —
Because thou hast the faith and love to see,
Through that same soul's distracting lethargy,
The patient angel waiting for a place
In the new Heavens! — because nor sin nor woe,
Nor God's infliction, nor death's neighborhood,
Nor all which others viewing, turn to go, . . .
Nor all which makes me tired of all, self-viewed, . . .
Nothing repels thee, . . . Dearest, teach me so
To pour out gratitude as thou dost, good.
How do I love thee ? Let me count the ways.
I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
LOVE POEMS. 173
For the ends of Being and ideal Grace.
I love thee to the level of everyday's
Most quiet need, by sun and candlelight.
I love thee freely, as men strive for Right ;
I love thee purely, as they turn from Praise.
I love thee with the passion put to use
In my old griefs, and with my childhood's faith.
I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
With my lost saints, — I love thee with the breath,
Smiles, tears, of all my life! — and, if God choose,
I shall but love thee better after death.
Elizabeth Barrett Browning.
FROM "THE EPITHALAMIUM."
Open the temple gates unto my love,
Open them wide that she may enter in,
And all the posts adorn as doth behove,
And all the pillars deck with garlands trim,
For to receive this saint with honor due,
That cometh in to you.
With trembling steps, and humble reverence,
She cometh in, before the Almighty's view :
Of her, ye virgins, learn obedience,
When so ye come into those holy places,
To humble your proud faces :
Bring her up to the high altar, that she may
The sacred ceremonies there partake,
The which do endless matrimony make ;
And let the roaring organs loudly play
174 LOVE POEMS.
The praises of the Lord in lively notes ;
The whiles, with hollow throats,
The choristers the joyous anthem sing,
That all the woods may answer, and their echo ring.
Behold, whiles she before the altar stands,
Hearing the holy priest that to her speaks,
And blesseth her with his two happy hands,
How the red roses flush up in her cheeks,
And the pure snow, with goodly vermeil stain,
Like crimson dyed in grain ;
That even the angels, which continually
About the sacred altar do remain,
Forget their service, and about her fly,
Oft peeping in her face, that seems more fair
The more they on it stare.
But her sad eyes, still fastened on the ground
Are governed with goodly modesty,
That suffers not one look to glance awry,
Which may let in a little thought unsound.
Why blush ye, love, to give to me your hand,
The pledge of all our band?
Sing, ye sweet angels, alleluia sing.
That all the woods may answer, and your echo ring.
Edmund Spenser.
A COMPLAINT.
There is a change, — and I am poor ;
Your love hath been, nor long ago,
A fountain at my fond heart's door,
THE BROKEN THREAO

LOVE POEMS. 175
Whose only business was to flow ;
And flow it did, not taking heed
Of its own bounty, or my need.
What happy moments did I count!
Blest was I then all bliss above!
Now, for that consecrated fount
Of murmuring, sparkling, living love,
What have I ? Shall I dare to tell?
A comfortless and hidden well.
A well of love ; it may be deep, —
I trust it is, —and never dry.
What matter? If the waters sleep
In silence and obscurity.
Such change, and at the very door
Of my fond heart, hath made me poor.
William Wordsworth.
TO ANTHEA.
Bid me to live, and I will live
Thy protestant to be :
Or bid me love, and I will give
A loving heart to thee.
A heart as soft, a heart as kind,
A heart as sound and free,
As in the whole world thou canst find.
That heart I'll give to thee.
176 LOVE POEMS.
Bid that heart stay, and it will stay,
To honor thy decree ;
Or bid it languish quite away,
And 't shall do so for thee.
Bid me to weep, and I will weep,
While I have eyes to see,
And having none, yet I will keep
A heart to weep for thee.
Bid me despair, and I'll despair
Under that cypress tree :
Or bid me die, and I will dare
E'en death, to die for thee.
Thou art my life, my love, my heart,
The very eyes of me,
And hast command of every part,
To live and die for thee.
Robert Herrick.
PASSAGES FROM "PARADISE LOST."
Under his forming hands a creature grew,
Manlike, but different sex, so lovely fair,
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained,
And in her looks, which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
LOVE POEMS. 177
She disappeared, and left me dark ; I waked
To find her, or forever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure :
When out of hope, beheld her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dreams, adorned
With what all earth of heaven could bestow
To make her amiable. On she came,
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice, nor uninformed
Of nuptial sanctity and marriage rites :
Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye,
In every gesture dignity and love! ******
If death
Consort with thee, death is to me as life,
So forcible within my heart I feel
The bond of nature draw me to my own,
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine ;
Our state cannot be severed, we are one,
One flesh, to lose thee were to lose myself.
******
With thee to go
Is to stay here ; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling ; thou to me
Art all things under heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
John Milton.
178 LOVE POEMS.
SONG.
I prithee send me back my heart,
Since I cannot have thine,
For if from yours you will not part,
Why, then, shouldst thou have mine?
Yet now I think on't, let it lie ;
To find it were in vain ;
For thou'st a thief in either eye
Would steal it back again.
Why should two hearts in one breast lie,
And yet not lodge together?
O Love ! where is thy sympathy,
If thus our breasts thou sever?
But love is such a mystery,
I cannot find it out ;
For when I think I'm best resolved,
I then am in most doubt.
Then farewell care, and farewell woe,
I will no longer pine :
For I'll believe I have her heart
As much as she has mine. Sir John Suckling.
A MATCH.
If love were what the rose is,
And I were like the leaf,
Our lives would grow together
In sad or singing weather,
LOVE POEMS. 179
Blown fields or flowerful closes,
Green pleasure or gray grief;
If love were what the rose is,
And I were like the leaf.
If I were what the words are,
And love were like the tune,
With double sound and single
Delight our lips would mingle,
With kisses glad as birds are
That get sweet rain at noon ;
If I were what the words are
And love were like the tune.
If you were Hie, my darling,
And I your love were death,
We'd shine and snow together
Ere March made sweet the weather
With daffodil and starling
And hours of fruitful breath ;
If you were life, my darling,
And I your love were death.
If you were thrall to sorrow,
And I were page to joy,
We'd play for lives and seasons
With loving looks and treasons
And tears of night and morrow
And laughs of maid and boy ;
If you were thrall to sorrow,
And I were page to joy.
180 LOVE POEMS.
If you were April's lady,
And I were lord in May,
We'd throw with leaves for hours
And draw for days with flowers,
Till day like night were shady
And night were bright like day ;
If you were April's lady,
And I were lord in May.
If you were queen of pleasure,
And I were king of pain,
We'd hunt down love together,
Pluck out his flying feather,
And teach his feet a measure,
And find his mouth a rein ;
If you were queen of pleasure,
And I were king of pain.
Algernon Charles Swinburne.
LINES.
Unfelt, unheard, unseen,
I've left my little queen,
Her languid arms in silver slumber lying.
Ah ! through their nestling touch,
Who — who can tell how much
There is for madness — cruel, or complying?
Those faery lids how sleek!
Those lips how moist! — they speak,
LOVE POEMS. 181
In ripest quiet, shadows of sweet sounds :
Into my fancy's ear
Melting a burden dear,
How "love doth know no fulness, and no bounds."
John Keats.
IF TO THY HEART I WERE AS NEAR.
If to thy heart I were as near
As thou art near to mine,
I'd hardly care though a' the year
Nae sun on earth suld shine, my dear!
Nae sun on earth suld shine !
Twin starries are thy glancing een, —
A warld they'd licht, and mair ;
And gin that ye be my Christine,
Ae blink to me ye'll spare, my dear,
Ae blink to me ye'll spare !
My leesome may I've wooed too lang ;
Aneath the trystin' tree
I've sung till a' the plantins rang
Wi' lays o' love for thee, my dear,
Wi' lays o' love for thee !
The dew-draps glisten on the green,
The laverlocks lilt on high.
We'll forth and down the lane, Christine,
And kiss when nane is nigh, my dear,
And kiss when nane is nigh !
William Motherwell.
182 LOVE POEMS.
CAELI.
If stars were really watching eyes
Of angel armies in the skies,
I should forget all watchers there,
And only for your glances care.
And if your eyes were really stars
With leagues that none can mete for bars
To keep me from their longed-for day,
I could not feel more far away!
GATHERED ROSES.
Only a bee made prisoner,
Caught in a gathered rose!
Was he not 'ware a flower so fair
For the first gatherer grows?
Only a heart made prisoner,
Going out free no more !
Was he not 'ware a face so fair
Must have been gathered before ?
Francis W. Bourdillon.
THE TIME I'VE LOST IN WOOING.
The time I've lost in wooing,
In watching and pursuing
The light that lies
In woman's eyes,
Has been my heart's undoing.
LOVE POEMS. 183
Though Wisdom oft has sought me,
I scorned the lore she brought me,
My only books
Were woman's looks,
And folly's all they've taught me.
Thomas Moore.
JOHN ANDERSON, MY JO.
John Anderson, my jo, John,
When we were first acquent,
Your locks were like the raven,
Your bonnie brow was brent ;
But now your brow is beld, John,
Your locks are like the snaw ;
But blessings on your frosty pow,
John Anderson, my jo.
John Anderson, my jo, John,
We clamb the hill thegither ;
And monie a canty day, John,
We've had wi' ane anither :
Now we maun totter down, John,
But hand in hand we'll go,
And sleep thegither at the foot,
John Anderson, my jo.
Robert Burns.
184 LOVE POEMS.
FADED LEAVES.
THE RIVER.
Still glides the stream, slow drops the boat
Under the rustling poplars' shade ;
Silent the swans beside us float :
None speaks, none heeds ; ah, turn thy head!
Let those arch eyes now softly shine,
That mocking mouth grow sweetly bland ;
Ah! let them rest, those eyes, on mine!
On mine let rest that lovely hand!
My pent-up tears oppress my brain,
My heart is swoln with love unsaid.
Ah ! let me weep, and tell my pain,
And on thy shoulder rest my head!
Before I die, — before the soul,
Which now is mine, must re-attain
Immunity from my control,
And wander round the world again ;
Before this teased, o'er-labored heart
Forever leaves its vain employ,
Dead to its deep habitual smart,
And dead to hopes of future joy.
LOVE POEMS. 185
TOO LATE.
Each on his own strict line we move,
And some find death ere they find love ;
So far apart their lives are thrown
From the twin soul that halves their own.
And sometimes, by still harder fate,
The lovers meet, but meet too late.
— Thy heart is mine! True, true! ah, true!
— Then, love, thy hand ! Ah, no ! adieu !
LONGING.
Come to me in my dreams, and then
By day I shall be well again !
For then the night will more than pay
The hopeless longing of the day.
Come, as thou cam'st a thousand times,
A messenger from radiant climes,
And smile on thy new world, and be
As kind to others as to me !
Or, as thou never cam'st in sooth,
Come now, and let me dream it truth ;
And part my hair, and kiss my brow,
And say, My love ! why sufferest thou ?
186 LOVE POEMS.
Come to me in my dreams, and then
By day I shall be well again!
For then the night will more than pay
The hopeless longing of the day.
Matthew Arnold.
URANIA.
She smiles and smiles, and will not sigh,
While we for hopeless passion die ;
Yet she could love, those eyes declare,
Were but men nobler than they are.
Eagerly once her gracious ken
Was turned upon the sons of men ;
But light the serious visage grew —
She looked, and smiled, and saw them through.
Our petty souls, our strutting wits,
Our labored, puny passion-fits, —
Ah, may she scorn them still, till we
Scorn them as bitterly as she!
Yet show her once, ye heavenly Powers,
One of some worthier race than ours!
One for whose sake she once might prove
How deeply she who scorns can love.
His eyes be like the starry lights,
His voice like sounds of summer nights ;
In all his lovely mien let pierce
The magic of the universe !
LOVE POEMS. 187
And she to him will reach her hand,
And gazing in his eyes will stand,
And know her friend, and weep for glee,
And cry, Long, long fve lookedfor thee.
Then will she weep : with smiles, till then,
Coldly she mocks the sons of men ;
Till then, her lovely eyes maintain
Their pure, unwavering, deep disdain.
Matthew Arnold.
SIR LAUNCELOT AND QUEEN GUINE
VERE.
A FRAGMENT.
Like souls that balance joy and pain,
With tears and smiles from heaven again
The maiden Spring upon the plain
Came in a sun-lit fall of rain.
In crystal vapor everywhere
Blue isles of heaven laugh'd between,
And, far in forest-deeps unseen,
The topmost elm-tree gather'd green
From draughts of balmy air.
Sometimes the linnet piped his song ;
Sometimes the throstle whistled strong :
Sometimes the sparhawk, wheel'd along,
Hush'd all the groves from fear of wrong :
188 LOVE POEMS.
By grassy capes with fuller sound
In curves the yellowing river ran,
And drooping chestnut-buds began
To spread into the perfect fan,
Above the teeming ground.
Then, in the boyhood of the year,
Sir Launcelot and Queen Guinevere
Rode thro' the coverts of the deer,
With blissful treble ringing clear.
She seem'd a part of joyous Spring;
A gown of grass-green silk she wore,
Buckled with golden clasps before ;
A light-green tuft of plumes she bore
Closed in a golden ring.
Now on some twisted ivy-net,
Now by some tinkling rivulet,
In mosses mixt with violet
Her cream-white mule his pastern set ;
And fleeter now she skimm'd the plains
Than she whose elfin prancer springs
By night to eery warblings,
When all the glimmering moorland rings
With jingling bridle-reins.
¦ As she fled fast thro' sun and shade,
The happy winds upon her play'd,
Blowing the ringlet from the braid :
She look'd so lovely, as she sway'd
The rein with dainty finger-tips,
LOVE POEMS. 189
A man had given all other bliss,
And all his worldly worth for this,
To waste his whole heart in one kiss
Upon her perfect lips.
Tennyson.
GUINEVERE.
But I was first of all the kings who drew
The knighthood-errant of this realm and all
The realms together under me, their Head,
In that fair order of my Table Round,
A glorious company, the flower of men,
To serve as model for the mighty world,
And be the fair beginning of a time.
I made them lay their hands in mine and swear
To reverence the King, as if he were
Their conscience, and their conscience as their
King,
To break the heathen and uphold the Christ,
To ride abroad redressing human wrongs,
To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it,
To lead sweet lives in purest chastity,
To love one maiden only, cleave to her,
And worship her by years of noble deeds,
Until they won her, for indeed I knew
Of no more subtle master under heaven
Than is the maiden passion for a maid,
Not only to keep down the base in man,
But teach high thought, and amiable words,
^ d
190 LOVE POEMS.
And courtliness, and the desire of fame,
And love of truth, and all that makes a man. * * * * * *
" Yet think not that I come to urge thy crimes,
I did not come to curse thee, Guinevere,
I, whose vast pity almost make me die
To see thee, laying there thy golden head,
My pride in happier summers, at my feet,
The wrath which forced my thoughts on that fierce
law,
The doom of treason and the flaming death,
(When first I learnt thee hidden here) is past
The pang —which while I weigh'd thy heart with
one
Too wholly true to dream untruth in thee,
Made my tears burn — is also past, in part.
And all is past, the sin is sinn'd, and I,
Lo! I forgive thee, as Eternal God
Forgives : do thou for thine own soul the rest.
But how to take last leave of all I loved?
0 golden hair, with which I used to play
Not knowing! O imperial-moulded form,
And beauty such as never woman wore,
Until it came a kingdom's curse with thee —
1 cannot touch thy lips, they are not mine,
But Lancelot's : nay, they never were the King's.
I cannot take thy hand ; that too is flesh,
And in the flesh thou hast sinn'd: and mine own
flesh,
Here looking down on thine polluted, cries
' I loathe thee : ' yet not less, O Guinevere,
LOVE POEMS. 191
For I was ever virgin save for thee,
My love thro' flesh hath wrought into my life
So far, that my doom is, I love thee still.
Let no man dream but that I love thee still.
Perchance, and so thou purify thy soul,
And so thou lean on our fair father Christ,
Hereafter in that world where all are pure
We two may meet before high God, and thou
Wilt spring to me, and claim me thine, and know
I am thine husband — not a smaller soul,
Nor Lancelot, nor another. Leave me that,
I charge thee, my last hope. Now must I hence.
Thro' the thick night I hear the trumpet blow :
They summon me their King to lead mine hosts
Far down to that great battle in the west,
Where I must strike against the man they call
My sister's son — no kin of mine, who leagues
With lords of the White-Horse, heathen, and
knights —
Traitors —and strike him dead, and meet myself
Death, or I know not what mysterious doom
And thou remaining here wilt learn the event :
But hither shall I never come again,
Never lie by thy side, see thee no more,
'Farewell!'"
*o* Tennyson.
ALTHO' THOU MAUN NEVER BE MINE.
Altho' thou maun never be mine
Altho' even hope is denied
'Tis sweeter for thee despairing
Than aught in the world beside —Jessy.
192 LOVE POEMS
I mourn thro' the gay, gaudy day,
As, hopeless, I muse on thy charms :
But welcome the dream o' sweet slumber,
For then I am lockt in thy arms —Jessy!
I guess by the dear angel smile,
I guess by the love-rolling ee ;
But why urge the tender confession
'Gainst fortune's cruel decree —Jessy!
Robert Burns.
CHANGES.
Whom first we love, you know, we seldom wed.
Time rules us all. And Life, indeed, is not
The thing we planned it out ere hope was dead.
And then, we women cannot choose our lot.
Much must be borne which it is hard to bear ;
Much given away which it were sweet to keep.
God help us all! who need, indeed his care.
And yet, I know the Shepherd loves his sheep.
My little boy begins to babble now
Upon my knee his earliest infant prayer.
He has his father's eager eyes I know ;
And, they say, too, his mother's sunny hair.
But when he sleeps and smiles upon my knee,
And I can feel his light breath come and go,
I think of one (Heaven help and pity me!) .
Who loved me, and whom I loved, long ago :
LOVE POEMS. 193
Who might have been ... ah what, I dare not
think!
We are all changed. God judges for us best.
God help us do our duty, and not shrink.
And trust in Heaven humbly for the rest!
But blame us women not, if some appear
Too cold at times ; and some too gay and light.
Some griefs gnaw deep. Some woes are hard to
bear.
Who knows the past ? and who can judge us right ?
Ah! were we judged by what we might have been,
And not by what we are —too apt to fall!
My little child — he sleeps and smiles between
These thoughts and me. In heaven we shall know
all! Robert Bulwer Lytton.
TWO LOVES.
Deep within my heart of hearts, dear,
Bound with all its strings,
Two Loves are together reigning,
Both are crowned like Kings ;
While my life, still uncomplaining,
Rests beneath their wings.
So they both will rule my heart, dear,
Till it cease to beat ;

POEMS. 195
XD SLAVE.
iear,
nld dwell,
^e, ere
Uio well ;
. circle
.w ami wise,
¦ rebodings,
hould rise; —
.hi, dear,
i^ns — a King,
cannot reach him,
: ii not sting;
i dishonor
^ .... to recall ;
. - and forever
and gives all !
.. dear,
c is — a Slave,
thought of freedom,
ills the grave ;
. niht or peril
;e there may be,
uld but drive him
.:.u-r to thee !
Adelaide Anne Procter.
194 LOVE POEMS.
No sway can be deeper, stronger,
Truer, more complete ;
Growing, as it lasts the longer
Sweeter, and more sweet.
One all life and time transfigures ;
Piercing through and through
Meaner things with magic splendor,
Old, yet ever new :
This — so strong and yet so tender —
Is . . . my Love for you.
Should it fail, — forgive my doubting
In this world of pain, —
Yet my other Love would ever
Steadfastly remain ;
And I know that I could never
Turn to that in vain.
Though its radiance may be fainter,
Yet its task is wide ;
For it lives to comfort sorrows,
Strengthen, calm, and guide,
And from Trust and Honor borrows
All its peace and pride.
Will you blame my dreaming, even
If the first were flown ?
Ah, I would not live without it,
It is all your own :
And the other — can you doubt it ? —
Yours, and yours alone.
Adelaide Anne Procter.
LOVE POEMS. 195
KING AND SLAVE.
If in my soul, dear,
An omen should dwell,
Bidding me pause, ere
I love thee too well ;
If the whole circle
Of noble and wise,
With stern forebodings,
Between us should rise ; —
I will tell them, dear,
That Love reigns — a King,
Where storms cannot reach him,
And words cannot sting ;
He counts it dishonor
His faith to recall ;
He trusts ; —and forever
He gives —and gives all !
I will tell thee, dear,
That Love is — a Slave,
Who dreads thought of freedom,
As life dreads the grave ;
And if doubt or peril
Of change there may be,
Such fear would but drive him
Still nearer to thee !
Adelaide Anne Procter.
196 LOVE POEMS.
LOVE.
We cannot live, except thus mutually
We alternate, aware or unaware,
The reflex act of life : and when we bear
Our virtue onward most impulsively,
Most full of invocation, and to be
Most instantly compellant, certes, there
We live most life, whoever breathes most air
And counts his dying years by sun and sea.
But when a soul, by choice and conscience, doth
Throw out her full force on another soul,
The conscience and the concentration both
Make mere life, Love. For Life in perfect whole
And aim consummated, is Love in sooth,
As nature's magnet-heat rounds pole with pole.
Mrs. Browning.
FIDELIS.
You have taken back the promise
That you spoke so long ago ;
Taken back the heart you gave me, —
I must even let it go.
Where love once has breathed, Pride dieth :
So I struggled, but in vain,
First to keep the links together,
Then to piece the broken chain.
LOVE POEMS. 197
But it might not be — so freely
All your friendship I restore,
And the heart that I had taken
As my own forevermore.
No shade of reproach shall touch you,
Dread no more a claim from me :
But I will not have you fancy
That I count myself as free.
I am bound by the old promise ;
What can break that golden chain?
Not even the words that you have spoken,
Or the sharpness of my pain :
Do you think because you fail me
And draw back your hand to-day,
That from out the heart I gave you
My strong love can fade away ?
It will live. No eyes may see it ;
In my soul it will lie deep,
Hidden from all ; but I shall feel it
Often stirring in its sleep.
So remember, that the friendship,
Which you now think poor and vain,
Will endure in hope and patience,
Till you ask for it again.
Perhaps in some long twilight hour,
Like those we have known of old,
When past shadows gather round you,
And your present friends grow cold,
You may stretch your hands out towards me, —
198 LOVE POEMS.
Ah! you will — I know not when —
I shall nurse my love and keep it
Faithfully, for you, till then.
Adelaide Anne Procter.
A LOVE TOKEN.
Do you grieve no costly offering
To the Lady you can make ?
One there is, and gifts less worthy
Queens have stooped to take.
Take a Heart of virgin silver,
Fashion it with heavy blows,
Cast it into Love's hot furnace
When it fiercest glows.
With Pain's sharpest point transfix it,
And then carve, in letters fair,
Tender dreams and quaint devices,
Fancies sweet and rare.
Set within it Hope's blue sapphire,
Many-changing opal fears,
Blood-red ruby-stones of daring,
Mixed with pearly tears.
And when you have wrought and labored
Till the gift is all complete,
You may humbly lay your offering
At the Lady's feet.
LOVE POEMS. 199
Should her mood perchance be gracious,
With disdainful, smiling pride,
She will place it with the trinkets
Glittering at her side. Adelaide Anne Procter.
TO MARY IN HEAVEN.
Thou lingering star, with less'ning ray,
That lov'st to greet the early morn,
Again thou usher'st in the day
My Mary from my soul was torn.
O Mary! dear departed shade! Where is thy place of blissful rest ?
Seest thou thy lover lowly laid ?
Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?
That sacred hour can I forget ?
Can I forget the hallow'd grove,
Where by the winding Ayr we met,
To live one day of parting love ?
Eternity will not efface
Those records dear of transports past ;
Thy image at our last embrace ;
Ah! little thought we 'twas our last!
Ayr gurgling kiss'd his pebbled shore, O'erhung with wildwoods, thick'ning green ;
The fragrant birch, and hawthorn hoar,
Twin'd am'rous round the raptur'd scene.
200 LOVE POEMS.
The flowers sprang wanton to be prest,
The birds sang love on ev'ry spray,
Till too, too soon, the glowing west
Proclaim'd the speed of winged day.
Still o'er these scenes my mem'ry wakes,
And fondly broods with miser care!
Time but the impression deeper makes,
As streams their channels deeper wear.
My Mary, dear departed shade!
Where is thy blissful place of rest?
Seest thou thy lover lowly laid?
Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?
Robert Burns.
MARGARET ALONE AT HER SPINNINGWHEEL.
(From Faust.)
My Heart's oppress'd,
My peace is o'er;
I know no rest,
No, nevermore.
The world's a grave
Where he is not ;
And grief is now
My bitter lot.
My wilder'd brain
Is overwrought ;
My feeble senses
Are distraught.
LOVE POEMS. 201
My heart's oppress'd,
My peace is o'er ;
I know no rest,
No, nevermore.
For him I watch
The live-long day,
For him alone
Abroad I stray.
His lofty step,
His bearing high,
The smile of his lip,
The power of his eye!
His witching words,
Their tones of bliss,
His hand's fond pressure,
And then, his kiss!
My heart's oppress'd,
My peace is o'er,
I know no rest,
No, nevermore.
My bosom aches
To feel him near.
Ah, could I clasp
And fold him here!
202 LOVE POEMS.
In love's fond blisses
Entranced I'd lie,
And die on his kisses,
In ecstasy! Goethe.
MARGARET TO DOLCINO.
Ask if I love thee ? Oh, smiles cannot tell
Plainer what tears are now showing too well.
Had I not loved thee, my sky had been clear :
Had I not loved thee, I had not been here,
Weeping by thee.
Ask if I love thee? How else could I borrow
Pride from man's slander, and strength from my
sorrow ?
Laugh when they sneer at the fanatic's bride,
Knowing no bliss, save to toil and abide
Weeping by thee.
Charles Kingsley.
DOLCINO TO MARGARET.
The world goes up and the world goes down,
And the sunshine follows the rain,
And yesterday's sneer and yesterday's frown
Can never come over again,
Sweet wife,
No, never come over again.
LOVE POEMS. 203
For woman is warm though man be cold,
And the night will follow the day,
Till the heart which at even was weary and old
Can rise in the morning gay,
Sweet wife,
To its work in the morning gay.
Charles Kings ley.
LOVE'S OMNIPRESENCE.
Were I as base as is the lowly plain,
And you, my Love, as high as heaven above,
Yet should the thoughts of me your humble swain
Ascend to heaven, in honor of my love.
Were I as high as heaven above the plain,
And you, my Love, as humble and as low
As are the deepest bottoms of the main,
Whereso'er you were, with you my love should go.
Were you the earth, dear Love, and I the skies,
My love should shine on you like to the sun,
And look upon you with ten thousand eyes
Till heaven wax'd blind, and till the world were done.
Whereso'er I am, below, or else above you,
Whereso'er you are, my heart shall truly love you.
J. Sylvester.
204 LOVE POEMS.
INCLUSIONS.
Oh, wilt thou have my hand, Dear, to lie along in
thine ?
As a little stone in a running stream, it seems to lie
and pine !
Now drop the poor pale hand, Dear, . . . unfit to
plight with thine.
Oh, wilt thou have my cheek, Dear, drawn closer to
thine own?
My cheek is white, my cheek is worn, by many a
tear run down.
Now leave a little space, Dear, . . . lest it should
wet thine own.
III.
Oh, must thou have my soul, Dear, commingled
with thy soul? —
Red grows the cheek, and warm the hand, . . . the
part is in the whole ! . . .
Nor hands nor cheeks keep separate, when soul is
joined to soul. Mrs. Browning.
LOVE POEMS. 205
INSUFFICIENCY.
i.
There is no one beside thee, and no one above
thee;
Thou standest alone, as the nightingale sings!
Yet my words that would praise thee are impotent
things,
For none can express thee though all should ap
prove thee !
I love thee so, Dear, that I only can love thee.
II.
Say, what can I do for thee? . . . weary thee . . .
grieve thee?
Lean on my shoulder . . . new burdens to add ?
Weep my tears over thee . . . making thee sad ?
Oh, hold me not — love me not? let me retrieve
thee!
I love thee so, Dear, that I only can leave thee.
Mrs. Browning.
TRANSLATIONS FROM HENRICH HEINE.
Im wunderschonen Monat Mai.
'Twas in the glorious month of May,
When all the buds were blowing,
I felt — ah me, how sweet it was ! —
Love in my heart a-growing.
206 LOVE POEMS.
'Twas in the glorious month of May,
When all the birds were quiring,
In burning words I told her all
My yearning, my aspiring.
Sir Theodore Martin.
Wenn ich in Deine Augen seh'.
Dear, when I look into thine eyes,
My deepest sorrow straightway flies ;
But when I kiss thy mouth, ah, then
No thought remains of bygone pain.
And when I lean upon thy breast,
No dream of heaven could be more blest ;
But, when thou say'st thou lovest me,
I fall to weeping bitterly.
Alma Strettell.
I.
Thou lovest me not, thou lovest me not!
'Tis scarcely worth a sigh :
Let me look in thy face, and no king in his place
Is a gladder man than I.
II.
Thou hatest me well, thou hatest me well —
Thy little red mouth has told :
Let it reach me a kiss, and, however it is,
My child, I am well consoled.
Mrs. Browning.
LOVE POEMS. 207
DU BIST WIE EIME BLUME.
E'en as a lovely flower
So fair, so pure thou art ;
I gaze on thee, and sadness
Comes stealing o'er my heart.
My hands I fain had folded
Upon thy soft brown hair,
Praying that God may keep thee
So lovely, pure, and fair.
Kate Freiugrath Kroeker.
The years they come and go,
The races drop in the grave,
Yet never the love doth so,
Which in my heart I have.
Could I see thee but once, one day
And sink down so on my knee,
And die in thy sight while I say,
"Lady, I love but thee!"
Mrs. Browning.
20S LOVE POEMS.
Saphire sind die Augen dein.
Two sapphires those dear eyes of thine,
Soft as the skies above thee ;
Thrice happy is the man to whom
Those dear eyes say : " I love thee."
A diamond is thy heart that gleams
With rays of purest fire ;
Thrice happy is the man for whom
It glows with love's desire.
Two rubies are those lips of thine,
Unrivalled in fresh glory ;
Thrice happy is the man to whom
They whisper their love story.
Could I but find that lucky man,
But meet that happy lover —
Meet him alone in some dark wood, —
His joy would soon be over.
Alma Stretteix.
TRISTRAM AND ISEULT.
I.
Ctiattam.
TRISTRAM.
Is she not come? The messenger was sure.
Prop me upon the pillows once again.
Raise me, my page! this cannot long endure.
—Christ, what a night! how the sleet whips the
pane! What lights will those out to the northward be ?
THE PAGE.
The lanterns of the fishing-boats at sea.
TRISTRAM.
Soft —who is that, stands by the dying fire?
THE PAGE.
Iseult.
TRISTRAM.
Ah ! not the Iseult I desire.
******
209
210 LOVE POEMS.
What knight is this so weak and pale,
Though the locks are yet brown on his noble head,
Propped on pillows in his bed,
Gazing seaward for the light
Of some ship that fights the gale
On this wild December night?
Over the sick man's feet is spread
A dark green forest-dress ;
A gold harp leans against the bed,
Ruddy in the fire's light.
I know him by his harp of gold,
Famous in Arthur's court of old ;
I know him by his forest-dress, —
The peerless hunter, harper, knight,
Tristram of Lyoness.
What lady is this, whose silk attire
Gleams so rich in the light of the fire ?
The ringlets on her shoulders lying
In their flitting lustre vying
With the clasp of burnished gold
Which her heavy robe doth hold.
Her looks are mild, her fingers slight
As the driven snow are white ;
But her cheeks are sunk and pale.
Is it that the bleak sea-gale
Beating from the Atlantic sea
On this coast of Brittany,
Nips too keenly the sweet flower?
Is it that a deep fatigue
Hath come on her, a chilly fear,
LOVE POEMS. 211
Passing all her youthful hour
Spinning with her maidens here,
Listlessly through the window-bars
Gazing seawards many a league
From her lonely shore-built tower,
While the knights are at the wars?
Or, perhaps, has her young heart
Felt already some deeper smart,
Of those that in secret the heart-strings rive,
Leaving her sunk and pale, though fair ?
Who is this snowdrop by the sea? —
I know her by her mildness rare,
Her snow-white hands, her golden hair ;
I know her by her rich silk dress,
And her fragile loveliness, —
The sweetest Christian soul alive,
Iseult of Brittany.
Iseult of Brittany? but where
Is that other Iseult fair,
That proud, first Iseult, Cornwall's queen?
She, whom Tristram's ship of yore
From Ireland to Cornwall bore,
To Tyntagel, to the side
Of King Marc, to be his bride?
She who, as they voyaged, quaffed
With Tristram that spiced magic draught
Which since then forever rolls
Through their blood, and binds their souls,
Working love, but working teen ?
There were two Iseults who did sway
212 LOVE POEMS.
Each her hour of Tristram's day ;
But one possessed his waning time,
The other his resplendent prime.
Behold her here, the patient flower,
Who possessed his darker hour!
Iseult of the snow-white hand
Watches pale by Tristram's bed.
She is here who had his gloom :
Where art thou who hadst his bloom?
One such kiss as those of yore
Might thy dying knight restore!
Does the love-draught work no more?
Art thou cold, or false or dead,
Iseult of Ireland?
Loud howls the wind, sharp patters the rain,
And the knight sinks back on his pillows again ;
He is weak with fever and pain,
And his spirit is not clear.
Hark! he mutters in his sleep,
As he wanders far from here,
Changes place and time of year,
And his closed eye doth sweep
O'er some fair unwintry sea,
Not this fierce Atlantic deep,
While he mutters brokenly, —
TRISTRAM.
The calm sea shines, loose hang the vessel's sails ;
Before us are the sweet green fields of Wales,
LOVE POEMS. 213
And overhead the cloudless sky of May.
" Ah ! would / were in those green fields at play,
Not pent on shipboard this delicious day !
Tristram, I pray thee, of thycourtesy.
Reach me my golden cup that stands by thee.
But pledge vie in it first for courtesy."
Ha! dost thou start? are thy lips blanched like
mine?
Child, 'tis no water this, 'tis poisoned wine!
Iseult! . . .
Ah, sweet angels, let him dream!
Keep his eyelids ; let him seem
Not this fever-wasted wight
Thinned and paled before his time,
But the brilliant youthful knight
In the glory of his prime,
Sitting in the gilded barge,
At thy side, thou lovely charge,
Bending gayly o'er thy hand,
Iseult of Ireland!
And she too, that princess fair,
If her bloom be now less rare,
Let her have her youth again,
Let her be as she was then!
Let her have her proud dark eyes,
And her petulant quick replies ;
Let her sweep her dazzling hand
With its gesture of command,
And shake back her raven hair
214 LOVE POEMS.
With the old imperious air!
As of old, so let her be,
That first Iseult, princess bright,
Chatting with her youthful knight
As he steers her o'er the sea,
Quitting at her father's will
The green isle where she was bred,
And her bower in Ireland,
For the surge-beat Cornish strand ;
Where the prince whom she must wed
Dwells on loud Tyntagel's hill,
High above the sounding sea.
And that golden cup her mother
Gave her, that her future lord,
Gave her, that King Marc and she,
Might drink it on their marriage-day,
And forever love each other, —
Let her, as she sits on board,
— Ah! sweet saints, unwittingly! —
See it shine, and take it up,
And to Tristram laughing say, —
" Sir Tristram, of thy courtesy,
Pledge me in my golden cup."
Let them drink it ; let their hands
Tremble, and their cheeks be flame,
As they feel the fatal bands
Of a love they dare not name,
With a wild delicious pain,
Twine about their hearts again!
Let the early summer be
Once more round them, and the sea
LOVE POEMS. 215
Blue, and o'er its mirror kind
Let the breath of the May-wind,
Wandering through their drooping sails,
Die on the green fields of Wales ;
Let a dream like this restore
What his eye must see no more.
TRISTRAM.
Chill blows the wind, the pleasaunce-walks are
drear :
Madcap, what jest was this, to meet me here?
Were feet like those made for so wild a way?
The southern winter-parlor, by my fay,
Had been the likeliest trysting-place to-day! —
" Tristram ! — nay, nay — thou must not take my
hand! —
Tristram ! — sweet love ! — we are betrayed — outplanned.
Fly — save thyself— save me ! J dare not stay.''
One last kiss first ! — " '/» vain — to horse —
Ah! sweet saints, his dream doth move
Faster surely than it should,
From the fever in his blood!
All the spring-time of his love
Is already gone and past,
And instead thereof is seen
Its winter, which endureth still, —
Tyntagel on its surge-beat hill,
216 LOVE POEMS.
The pleasaunce-walks, the weeping quet
The flying leaves, the straining blast,
And that long, wild kiss, — their last.
And this rough December-night,
And his burning fever-pain,
Mingle with his hurrying dream,
Till they rule it ; till he seem
The pressed fugitive again,
The love-desperate, banished knight,
With a fire in his brain,
Flying o'er the stormy main.
— Whither does he wander now?
Haply in his dreams the wind
Wafts him here, and lets him find
The lovely orphan child again
In her castle by the coast ;
The youngest, fairest chatelaine,
That this realm of France can boast,
Our snowdrop by the Atlantic sea, —
Iseult of Brittany.
And — for through the haggard air,
The stained arms, the matted hair,
Of that stranger-knight ill-starred,
There gleamed something which recalled
The Tristram who in better days
Was Launcelot's guest at Joyous Gard —
Welcomed here, and here installed,
Tended of his fever here,
Haply he seems again to move
His young guardian's heart with love, In his exiled loneliness,
LOVE POEMS. 217
In his stately, deep distress,
Without a word, without a tear.
— Ah! 'tis well he should retrace
His tranquil life in this lone place ;
His gentle bearing at the side
Of his timid youthful bride ;
His long rambles by the shore
On winter-evenings, when the roar
Of the near waves came, sadly grand,
Through the dark, up the drowned sand ;
Or his endless reveries
In the woods, where the gleams play
On the grass under the trees,
Passing the long summer's day
Idle as a mossy stone
In the forest depths alone,
The chase neglected, and his hound
Couched beside him on the ground.
— Ah ! what trouble's on his brow ?
Hither let him wander now;
Hither, to the quiet hours
Passed among these heaths of ours
By the gray Atlantic sea, —
Hours, if not of ecstasy,
From violent anguish surely free!
TRISTRAM.
All red with blood the whirling river flows,
The wide plain rings, the dazed air throbs with
blows.
218 LOVE POEMS.
Upon us are the chivalry of Rome ;
Their spears are down, their steeds are bathed in
foam.
" Up, Tristram, up ! " men cry, " thou moonstruck
knight!
What foul fiend rides thee? On into the fight!"
— Above the din, her voice is in my ears ;
I see her form glide through the crossing spears. —
Iseult! . . .
Ah ! he wanders forth again ;
We cannot keep him : now, as then,
There's a secret in his breast
Which will never let him rest.
These musing fits in the green wood,
They cloud the brain, they dull the blood!
— His sword is sharp, his horse is good ;
Beyond the mountains will he see
The famous towns of Italy,
And label with the blessed sign
The heathen Saxons on the Rhine.
At Arthur's side he fights once more
With the Roman Emperor.
There's many a gay knight where he goes
Will help him to forget his care ;
The march, the leaguer, heaven's blithe air,
The neighing steeds, the ringing blows, —
Sick pining comes not where these are.
— Ah ! what boots it, that the jest
Lightens every other brow,
LOVE POEMS. 219
What, that every other breast
Dances as the trumpets blow,
If one's own heart beats not light
On the waves of the tossed fight,
If one's self cannot get free
From the clog of misery ?
Thy lovely youthful wife grows pale
Watching by the salt sea-tide,
With her children at her side.
For the gleam of thy white sail.
Home, Tristram, to thy halls again!
To our lonely sea complain,
To our forests tell thy pain.
TRISTRAM.
All round the forest sweeps off, black in shade,
But it is moonlight in the open glade ;
And in the bottom of the glade shine clear
The forest-chapel and the fountain near.
— I think I have a fever in my blood ;
Come, let me leave the shadow of this wood,
Ride down, and bathe my hot brow in the flood.
— Mild shines the cold spring in the moon's clear
light.
God! 'tis her face plays in the waters bright!
" Fair love," she says, " canst thou forget so soon,
At this soft hour, under this sweet moon ? " —
Iseult! . . .
******
Ah, poor soul! if this be so,
Only death can balm thy woe.
220 LOVE POEMS.
The solitudes of the green wood
Had no medicine for thy mood ;
The rushing battle cleared thy blood
As little as did solitude.
— Ah! his eyelids slowly break
Their hot seals, and let him wake ;
What new change shall we now see?
A happier? Worse it cannot be.
TRISTRAM.
Is my page here? Come, turn me to the fire!
Upon the window-panes the moon shines bright ;
The wind is down ; but she'll not come to-night.
Ah, no! she is asleep in Cornwall now.
Far hence ; her dreams are fair, smooth is her brow.
Of me she recks not, nor my vain desire.
— I have had dreams, I have had dreams, my page,
Would take a score years from a strong man's age ;
And with a blood like mine, will leave, I fear,
Scant leisure for a second messenger.
—My princess, art thou there? Sweet, 'tis too late!
To bed, and sleep! my fever is gone by ;
To-night my page shall keep me company.
Where do the children sleep? kiss them for me!
Poor child, thou art almost as pale as I :
This comes of nursing long and watching late.
To bed —good-night!
******
She left the gleam-lit fireplace,
She came to the bedside ;
LOVE POEMS. 221
She took his hands in hers, her tears
Down on her slender fingers rained.
She raised her eyes upon his face,
Not with a look of wounded pride,
A look as if the heart complained ;
Her look was like a sad embrace, —
The gaze of one who can divine
A grief, and sympathize.
Sweet flower! thy children's eyes
Are not more innocent than thine.
But they sleep in sheltered rest,
Like helpless babes in the warm nest,
On the castle's southern side ;
Where feebly comes the mournful roar
Of buffeting wind and surging tide
Through many a room and corridor.
— Full on their window the moon's ray
Makes their chamber as bright as day.
It shines upon the blank white walls,
And on the snowy pillow falls,
And on two angel-heads doth play
Turned to each other ; the eyes closed,
The lashes on the cheeks reposed.
Round each sweet brow the cap close-set
Hardly lets peep the golden hair ;
Through the soft-opened lips, the air
Scarcely moves the coverlet.
One little wandering arm is thrown
At random on the counterpane,
And often the fingers close in haste
222 LOVE POEMS.
As if their baby-owner chased
The butterflies again.
This stir they have, and this alone ;
But else they are so still!
— Ah, tired madcaps ! you lie still ;
But were you at the window now,
To look forth on the fairy sight
Of your illumined haunts by night,
To see the park-glades where you play
Far lovelier than they are by day,
To see the sparkle on the eaves,
And upon every giant-bough
Of those old oaks, whose wet red leaves
Are jewelled with bright drops of rain, —
How would your voices run again!
And far beyond the sparkling trees
Of the castle-park, one sees
The bare heaths spreading, clear as day,
Moor behind moor, far, far away,
Into the heart of Brittany.
And here and there, locked by the land,
Long inlets of smooth glittering sea,
And many a stretch of watery sand
All shining in the white moonbeams.
But you see fairer in your dreams!
What voices are these on the clear night air?
What lights in the court, what steps on the stair?
LOVE POEMS. 223
II.
Istult of Ireland.
TRISTRAM.
Raise the light, my page! that I may see her. —
Thou art come at last, then, haughty queen!
Long I've waited, long I've fought my fever;
Late thou comest, cruel thou hast been.
ISEULT.
Blame me not, poor sufferer! that I tarried :
Bound I was, I could not break the band.
Chide not with the past, but feel the present ;
I am here, we meet, I hold thy hand.
TRISTRAM.
Thou art come, indeed ; thou hast rejoined me ;
Thou hast dared it — but too late to save.
Fear not now that men should tax thine honor!
I am dying; build (thou may'st) my grave.
ISEULT.
Tristram, ah! for love of heaven, speak kindly!
What! I hear these bitter words from thee?
Sick with grief I am, and faint with travel ;
Take my hand — dear Tristram, look on me!
224 LOVE POEMS.
TRISTRAM.
I forgot, thou comest from thy voyage ;
Yes, the spray is on thy cloak and hair.
But thy dark eyes are not dimmed, proud Iseult!
And thy beauty never was more fair.
Ah, harsh flatterer! let alone my beauty!
I, like thee, have left my youth afar.
Take my hand, and touch these wasted fingers ;
See my cheek and lips, how white they are !
TRISTRAM.
Thou art paler; but thy sweet charm, Iseult,
Would not fade with the dull years away.
Ah, how fair thou standest in the moonlight!
I forgive thee, Iseult! thou wilt stay?
Fear me not, I will be always with thee ;
I will watch thee, tend thee, soothe thy pain ;
Sing thee tales of true, long-parted lovers,
Joined at evening of their days again.
TRISTRAM.
No, thou shalt not speak! I should be finding
Something altered in thy courtly tone.
Sit — sit by me! I will think, we've lived so
In the green wood, all our lives, alone.
LOVE POEMS. 225
ISEULT.
Altered, Tristram? Not in courts, believe me.
Love like mine is altered in the breast :
Courtly life is light, and cannot reach it ;
Ah! it lives, because so deep-suppressed!
What! thou think'st men speak in courtly cham
bers
Words by which the wretched are consoled?
What! thou think'st this aching brow was cooler,
Circled, Tristram, by a band of gold?
Royal state with Marc, my deep-wronged hus
band, —
That was bliss to make my sorrows flee!
Silken courtiers whispering honeyed nothings, —
Those were friends to make me false to thee!
Ah ! on which, if both our lots were balanced,
Was indeed the heaviest burden thrown, —
Thee, a pining exile in thy forest,
Me, a smiling queen upon my throne?
Vain and strange debate, where both have suffered,
Both have passed a youth repressed and sad,
Both have brought their anxious day to evening,
And have now short space for being glad!
Joined we are henceforth ; nor will thy people
Nor thy younger Iseult take it ill.
That a former rival shares her office,
When she sets her humbled, pale, and still.
226 LOVE POEMS.
I, a faded watcher by thy pillow,
I, a statue on thy chapel-floor,
Poured in prayer before the Virgin-Mother,
Rouse no anger, make no rivals more.
She will cry, " Is this the foe I dreaded ?
This his idol, this that royal bride?
Ah! an hour of health would purge his eyesight!
Stay, pale queen, forever by my side."
Hush, no words! that smile, I see, forgives me.
I am now thy nurse, I bid thee sleep.
Close thine eyes : this flooding moonlight blinds
them.
Nay, all's well again! thou must not weep.
TRISTRAM.
I am happy! yet I feel there's something
Swells my heart, and takes my breath away.
Through a mist I see thee ; near — come nearer!
Bend — bend down ! I yet have much to say.
ISEULT.
Heaven! his head sinks back upon the pillow. —
Tristram! Tristram! let thy heart not fail!
Call on God and on the holy angels!
What, love, courage! —Christ! he is so pale.
TRISTRAM.
Hush, 'tis vain : I feel my end approaching.
This is what my mother said should be,
When the fierce pains took her in the forest.
The deep draughts of death, in bearing me.
LOVE POEMS. 227
" Son," she said, " thy name shall be of sorrow ;
Tristram art thou called for my death's sake."
So she said, and died in the drear forest.
Grief since then his home with me doth make.
I am dying. Start not, nor look wildly!
Me, thy living friend, thou canst not save.
But, since living we were ununited,
Go not far, O Iseult! from my grave.
Close mine eyes, then seek the princess Iseult ;
Speak her fair, she is of royal blood.
Say, I charged her, that thou stay beside me :
She will grant it; she is kind and good.
Now to sail the seas of death I leave thee —
One last kiss upon the living shore!
Tristram! Tristram! stay — receive me with thee!
Iseult leaves thee, Tristram! nevermore.
******
You see them clear — the moon shines bright.
Slow, slow and softly, where she stood,
She sinks upon the ground ; her hood
Had fallen back, her arms outspread
Still hold her lover's hands ; her head
Is bowed, half-buried, on the bed.
O'er the blanched sheet, her raven hair
Lies in disordered streams ; and there,
22S LOVE POEMS.
Strung like white stars, the pearls still are ;
And the golden bracelets, heavy and rare,
Flash on her white arms still, —
The very same which yesternight
Flashed in the silver sconces' light,
When the feast was gay and the laughter loud
In Tyntagel's palace proud.
But then they decked a restless ghost
With hot-flushed cheeks and brilliant eyes,
And quivering lips on which the tide
Of courtly speech abruptly died,
And a glance which over the crowded floor,
The dancers, and the festive host,
Flew ever to the door ;
That the knights eyed her in surprise,
And the dames whispered scoffingly, —
" Her moods, good lack, they pass like showers!
But yesternight and she would be
As pale and still as withered flowers ;
And now to-night she laughs and speaks,
And has a color in her cheeks.
Christ keep us from such fantasy!" —
Yes, now the longing is o'erpast,
Which, dogged by fear and fought by shame,
Shook her weak bosom day and night,
Consumed her beauty like a flame,
And dimmed it like the desert-blast.
And though the curtains hide her face,
Yet, were it lifted to the light,
The sweet expression of her brow
LOVE POEMS. 229
Would charm the gazer, till his thought
Erased the ravages of time,
Filled up the hollow cheek, and brought
A freshness back as of her prime, —
So healing is her quiet now ;
So perfectly the lines express
A tranquil, settled loveliness,
Her younger rival's purest grace.
The air of the December-night
Steals coldly around the chamber bright,
Where those lifeless lovers be.
Swinging with it, in the light
Flaps the ghost-like tapestry.
And on the arras wrought you see
A stately huntsman, clad in green,
And round him a fresh forest-scene.
On that clear forest-knoll he stays,
With his pack round him, and delays.
He stares and stares, with troubled face,
At this huge, gleam-lit fireplace,
At that bright, iron-figured door,
And those blown rushes on the floor.
He gazes down into the room
With heated cheeks and flurried air,
And to himself he seems to say, —
" What place is this, and who are they ?
Who is that kneeling lady fair ?
And on his pillows that pale knight
Who seems of marble on a tomb ?
How comes it here, this chamber bright,
230 LOVE POEMS.
Through whose mullioned windows clear
The castle-court all wet with rain,
The drawbridge and the moat appear.
And then the beach, and, marked with spray,
The sunken reefs, andfar away
The unquiet bright Atlantic plain ?
— What ! has some glamour made me sleep,
And sent me with my dogs to sweep.
By night, with boisterous bugle-peal,
Through some old, sea-side, knightly hall,
Not in thefree green wood at all?
That knight's asleep, and at her prayer
That lady by the bed doth kneel —
Then hush, thou boisterous bugle-peal I
— The wild boar rustles in his lair ;
The fierce hounds snuff the tainted air ;
But lord and hounds keep rooted there.
Cheer, cheer thy dogs into the brake,
O hunter! and without a fear
Thy golden-tasselled bugle blow,
And through the glades thy pastime take —
For thou wilt rouse no sleepers here!
For these thou seest are unmoved ;
Cold, cold as those who lived and loved
A thousand years ago.
LOVE POEMS. 231
III.
lEsettlt of Brtttang.
A year had flown, and o'er the sea away,
In Cornwall, Tristram and Queen Iseult lay ;
In King Marc's chapel, in Tyntagel old :
There in a ship they bore those lovers cold.
The young surviving Iseult, one bright day,
Had wandered forth. Her children were at play
In a green circular hollow in the heath
Which borders the seashore ; a country path
Creeps over it from the tilled fields behind.
The hollow's grassy banks are soft-inclined ;
And to one standing on them, far and near
The lone unbroken view spreads bright and clear
Over the waste. The cirque of open ground
Is light and green ; the heather, which all round
Creeps thickly, grows not here ; but the pale grass
Is strewn with rocks and many a shivered mass
Of veined white-gleaming quartz, and here and there
Dotted with holly-trees and juniper.
In the smooth centre of the opening stood
Three hollies side by side, and made a screen,
Warm with the winter-sun, of burnished green
With scarlet berries gemmed, the fell-fare's food.
Under the glittering hollies Iseult stands,
Watching her children play : their little hands
Are busy gathering spars of quartz, and streams
232 LOVE POEMS.
Of stagshorn for their hats ; anon, with screams
Of mad delight they drop their spoils, and bound
Among the holly-clumps and broken ground,
Racing full speed, and startling in their rush
The fell-fares and the speckled missel-thrush
Out of their glossy coverts ; but when now
Their cheeks were flushed, and over each hot brow,
Under the feathered hats of the sweet pair,
In blinding masses showered the golden hair,
Then Iseult called them to her, and the three
Clustered under the holly-screen, and she
Told them an old-world Breton history.
Warm in their mantles wrapped, the three stood
there,
Under the hollies, in the clear still air, —
Mantles with those rich furs deep glistering
Which Venice ships do from swart Egypt bring.
Long they stayed still, then, pacing at their ease,
Moved up and down under the glossy trees ;
But still, as they pursued their warm dry road,
From Iseult's lips the unbroken story flowed,
And still the children listened, their blue eyes
Fixed on their mother's face in wide surprise.
Nor did their looks stray once to the sea-side,
Nor to the brown heaths round them, bright and
wide,
Nor to the snow, which, though 'twas all away
From the open heath, still by the hedgerows lay,
Nor to the shining sea-fowl, that with screams
Bore up from where the bright Atlantic gleams,
LOVE POEMS. 233
Swooping to landward ; nor to where, quite clear,
The fell-fares settled on the thickets near.
And they would still have listened, till dark night
Came keen and chill down on the heather bright ;
But when the red glow on the sea grew cold,
And the gray turrets of the castle old
Looked sternly through the frosty evening-air,
Then Iseult took by the hand those children fair.
And brought her tale to an end, and found the path,
And led them home over the darkening heath.
And is she happy? Does she see unmoved
The days in which she might have lived and loved
Slip without bringing bliss slowly away,
One after one, to-morrow like to-day?
Joy has not found her yet, nor ever will :
Is it this thought which makes her mien so still,
Her features so fatigued, her eyes, though sweet,
So sunk, so rarely lifted save to meet
Her children's ? She moves slow ; her voice alone
Hath yet an infantine and silver tone,
But even that comes languidly ; in truth,
She seems one dying in a mask of youth.
And now she will go home, and softly lay
Her laughing children in their beds, and play
A while with them before they sleep ; and then
She'll light her silver lamp, —which fishermen
Dragging their nets through the rough waves afar,
Along this iron coast, know like a star, —
And take her broidery-frame, and there she'll sit
Hour after hour, her gold curls sweeping it ;
Lifting her soft-bent head only to mind
234 LOVE POEMS.
Her children, or to listen to the wind.
And when the clock peals midnight, she will move
Her work away, and let her ringers rove
Across the shaggy brows of Tristram's hound,
Who lies, guarding her feet, along the ground ;
Or else she will fall musing, her blue eyes
Fixed, her slight hands clasped on her lap ; then
rise,
And at her prie-dieu kneel, until she have told
Her rosary-beads of ebony tipped with gold ;
Then to her soft sleep — and to-morrow'll be
To-day's exact repeated effigy.
Yes, it is lonely for her in her hall.
The children, and the gray-haired seneschal,
Her women, and Sir Tristram's aged hound,
Are there the sole companions to be found.
But these she loves ; and noisier life than this
She would find ill to bear, weak as she is.
She has her children, too, and night and day
Is with them ; and the wide heaths where they play,
The hollies, and the cliff, and the sea-shore,
The sand, the sea-birds, and the distant sails,
These are to her dear as to them ; the tales
With which this day the children she beguiled
She gleaned from Breton grandames, when a child,
In every hut along this sea-coast wild;
She herself loves them still, and, when they are told,
Can forget all to hear them, as of old.
Dear saints, it is not sorrow, as I hear,
Not suffering, which shuts up eye and ear
LOVE POEMS. 23S
To all that has delighted them before,
And lets us be what we were once no more.
No : we may suffer deeply, yet retain
Power to be moved and soothed, for all our pain,
By what of old pleased us, and will again.
No : 'tis the gradual furnace of the world,
In whose hot air our spirits are upcurled
Until they crumble, or else grow like steel,
Which kills in us the bloom, the youth, the spring;
Which leaves the fierce necessity to feel,
But takes away the power : this can avail,
By drying up our joy in everything,
To make our former pleasures all seem stale.
This, or some tyrannous single thought, some fit
Of passion, which subdues our souls to it,
Till for its sake alone we live and move, —
Call it ambition, or remorse, or love, —
This too can change us wholly, and make seem
All which we did before, shadow and dream.
And yet, I swear, it angers me to see
How this fool passion gulls men potently ;
Being, in truth, but a diseased unrest,
And an unnatural overheat at best.
How they are full of languor and distress
Not having it ; which when they do possess,
They straightway are burnt up with fume and care,
And spend their lives in posting here and there
Where this plague drives them ; and have little ease,
Are furious with themselves, and hard to please.
Like that bald Caesar, the famed Roman wight,
Who wept at reading of a Grecian knight
236 LOVE POEMS.
Who made a name at younger years than he ;
Or that renowned mirror of chivalry,
Prince Alexander. Philip's peerless son,
Who carried the great war from Macedon
Into the Soudan's realm, and thundered on
To die at thirty-five in Babylon.
What tale did Iseult to the children say,
Under the hollies, that bright winter's day?
She told them of the fairy-haunted land
Away the other side of Brittany,
Beyond the heaths, edged by the lonely sea ;
Of the deep forest-glades of Broce-liande,
Through whose green boughs the golden sunshine
creeps,
Where Merlin by the enchanted thorn-tree sleeps.
For here he came with the fay Vivian,
One April, when the warm days first began.
He was on foot, and that false fay, his friend,
On her white palfrey; here he met his end,
In these lone sylvan glades, that April-day.
This tale of Merlin and the lovely fay
Was the one Iseult chose, and she brought clear
Before the children's fancy him and her.
Blowing between the stems, the forest-air
Had loosened the brown locks of Vivian's hair,
Which played on her flushed cheek, and her blue
eyes
Sparkled with mocking glee and exercise.
LOVE POEMS. 237
Her palfrey's flanks were mired and bathed in sweat,
For they had travelled far and not stopped yet.
A brier in that tangled wilderness
Had scored her white right hand, which she allows
To rest ungloved on her green riding-dress ;
The other warded off the drooping boughs.
But still she chatted on, with her blue eyes
Fixed full on Merlin's face, her stately prize.
Her 'havior had the morning's fresh clear grace,
The spirit of the woods was in her face ;
She looked so witching fair, that learned wight
Forgot his craft, and his best wits took flight,
And he grew fond, and eager to obey
His mistress, use her empire as she may.
They came to where the brushwood ceased, and day
Peered 'twixt the stems ; and the ground broke away
In a sloped sward down to a brawling brook.
And up as high as where they stood to look
On the brook's farther side was clear; but then
The underwood and trees began again.
This open glen was studded thick with thorns
Then white with blossom ; and you saw the horns,
Through last year's fern, of the shy fallow-deer
Who come at noon down to the water here.
You saw the bright-eyed squirrels dart along
Under the thorns on the green sward ; and strong
The blackbird whistled from the dingles near,
And the weird chipping of the woodpecker
Rang lonelily and sharp ; the sky was fair,
And a fresh breath of spring stirred everywhere.
23S LOVE POEMS.
Merlin and Vivian stopped on the slope's brow,
To gaze on the light sea of leaf and bough
Which glistening plays all round them, lone and
mild,
As if to itself the quiet forest smiled.
Upon the brow-top grew a thorn, and here
The grass was dry and mossed, and you saw clear
Across the hollow ; white anemones
Starred the cool turf, and clumps of primroses
Ran out from the dark underwood behind.
No fairer resting-place a man could find. .
" Here let us halt," said Merlin then ; and she
Nodded, and tied her palfrey to a tree.
They sate them down together, and a sleep
Fell upon Merlin, more like death, so deep.
Her finger on her lips, then Vivian rose,
And from her brown-locked head the wimple throws,
And takes it in her hand, and waves it over
The blossomed thorn-tree and her sleeping lover.
Nine times she waved the fluttering wimple round,
And made a little plot of magic ground.
And in that daisied circle, as men say,
Is Merlin prisoner till the judgment-day ;
But she herself whither she will can rove —
For she was passing weary of his love.
Matthew Arnold.
Once in the backyard, she was once like me
She was once like me
Twice when I killed them, they were once at peace
They were once like me
Hold to your gun, man and put off all your peace
Put off all the beats

Paid a full of these
I wait for it, but someone's once like me
She was once like me

I once was better, I put off all my grief
I put off all my grief
And so I go to hell, I wait for it but someone's left me creased
And someone's left me creased

"All The Trees Of The Field Will Clap Their Hands"

If I am alive this time next year
will I have arrived in time to share?
And mine is about as good this far
And I'm still applied to what you are

And I am joining all my thoughts to you
And I'm preparing every part for you

And I heard from the trees a great parade
And I heard from the hills a band was made
And will I be invited to the sound?
And will I be a part of what you've made?

And I am throwing all my thoughts away
And I'm destroying every bet I've made
And I am joining all my thoughts to you
And I'm preparing every part for you
















































"To Be Alone With You"

I'd swim across Lake Michigan
I'd sell my shoes
I'd give my body to be back again
In the rest of the room

To be alone with you
To be alone with you
To be alone with you
To be alone with you

You gave your body to the lonely
They took your clothes
You gave up a wife and a family
You gave your ghost

To be alone with me
To be alone with me
To be alone with me
You went up on a tree

To be alone with me you went up on a tree
I've never known a man who loved me

Abraham

I was the best man in a size too small
You were my best friend, going at it all
And what if I put off my inheritance?
Where is the best man? All arise us all in peace

I still know you
And I still like you, the best man
And I still owe you

Everything rises, going at it all
All the surprises in a size too small
And what if I told you I was still in love with this?
Would you surprise us in a size for all of me?

I still know you
And I still like you, the best man
I still know you, the best man
I still owe you









So faithful, so few
So pardon and done
And when we receive
We give a change at last

And when we are dead, we all have wings
We won't need legs to stand
And when we receive
To see a change at last








Our stepmom, we did everything to hate her 
She took us down to the edge of Decatur 
We saw the lion and the kangaroo take her 
Down to the river where they caught a wild alligator 

Sangamon River, it overflowed 
It caused a mudslide on the banks of the operator 
Civil War skeletons in their graves
They came up clapping in the spirit of the aviator 

The sound of the engines and the smell of the grain
We go riding on the abolition grain train
Stephen A. Douglas was a great debater
But Abraham Lincoln was the great emancipator 

Chickenmobile with your rooster tail
I had my fill, and I know how bad it feels
Stay awake and watch for the data
No small caterpillar, go congratulate her

Denominator, go Decatur, go Decatur
It's the great I am 
Abominate her, go Decatur, why did we hate her? 
It's the great I am 
Denominator, go Decatur, anticipate her 
It's the great I am 
Appreciate her, appreciate her
Stand up and thank her

Stand up and thank her
It's the great I am
Stand up and thank her
It's the great I am
Stand up and thank her
It's the great I am
Stand up and thank her
















Oh, to see without my eyes
The first time that you kissed me
Boundless by the time I cried
I built your walls around me
White noise, what an awful sound
Fumbling by Rogue River
Feel my feet above the ground
Hand of God, deliver me

Oh, woah woe is me
The first time that you touched me
Oh, will wonders ever cease?
Blessed be the mystery of love

Lord, I no longer believe
Drowned in living waters
Cursed by the love that I received
From my brother's daughter
Like Hephaestion, who died
Alexander's lover
Now my riverbed has dried
Shall I find no other?
I have loved you for the last time
Is it a video? Is it a video?
I have touched you for the last time
Is it a video? Is it a video?

For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Is it a video? Is it a video?
For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Is it a video? Is it a video? Is it a video?
Carrie and Lowell)

Carrie and Lowell
Summertime long ago
Like a dead horse
Meadowlark drive your arrow

Carry me home
Rosie has turned to sorrow
Head on the floorboards
Drunk as a horsefly
Climb on my mattress pad
Twist my arm

Under the pear tree
Shadows and light conspiring
Covered bridge, I scream
Cottage Grove shade invite me

I will bow down
Lord of the ancient waters
In the backyard
Carrie surprised me
Erebus on her back
Like a charm

Suppose the world was not informed by real estate or power lines?
The hidden river of my life, pursued by love
The whispering stone, the valley ford, the candy corn, the spirit finds
Abuse has left me on my side, a single stone

I'm a walker, I'm a dreamer
Treehouse greeter, Pentacostal preacher
I'm a rocker, yeah I'm a schemer
Compost preacher, pioneer believer

A small betrayal, a simple thought to shrug it off, unoccupied
The precious lake, the riverbed, the rising tide
The sad surprise, the day of flags, the flooding fox, the clever chime
Awake my soul, awake my heart and you will find
Shall we beat this or celebrate it?
You're not the one to talk things through
You checked your texts while I masturbated
Manelich, I feel so used

Found myself on Spencer's Butte
Traced your shadow with my shoe
Empty outline changed my view
Now all of me thinks less of you

On the sheet I see your horizon
All of me pressed onto you
But in this light you look like Poseidon
I'm just a ghost you walk right through

Saw myself on Spencer's Butte (All of me wants all of you)
Landscape changed my point of view (All of me wants all of you)
Revelation may come true (All of me wants all of you)
Now all of me thinks less of you (All of me wants all of you)

(All of me wants all of you) [repeat]
Are we to speak, first day of the week
Stumbling words at the bar
Beauty blue eyes, my order of fries
Long island kindness and wine
Beloved of John, I get it all wrong
I read you for some kind of poem
Covered in lines, the fossils I find
Have they no life of their own?

So can we pretend sweetly
Before the mystery ends?
I am a man with a heart that offends
With its lonely and greedy demands
There’s only a shadow of me; in a manner of speaking I'm dead

Such a waste, your beautiful face
Stumbling carpet arise
Go follow your gem, your white feathered friend
Icarus, point to the sun
If history speaks of two baby teeth
I’m painting the hills blue and red
They said beware, Lord hear my prayer
I’ve wasted my throes on your head

So can we be friends, sweetly
Before the mystery ends?
I love you more than the world can contain
In its lonely and ramshackle head
There’s only a shadow of me; in a manner of speaking I'm dead

I’m holding mCarrie and Lowell
Such a long time ago
Like a dead horse
Meadowlark drive your arrow

Season of hope (after the flood)
Valentine, spurn my sorrow
Head on the floorboards (covered in blood)
Drunk as a horsefly
Climb on the mattress pad
Twist my arm

Under the pear tree
Shadows and light conspiring
Covered bridge, I scream
Cottage Grove shade invite me

I will bow down (Dido’s lament)
Lord of the ancient waters
From the backyard (as far as she went)
Carrie surprised me
Erebus on my back
My lucky charm
The only thing that keeps me from driving this car
Half-light, jack knife into the canyon at night
Signs and wonders: Perseus aligned with the skull
Slain Medusa, Pegasus alight from us all

Do I care if I survive this? Bury the dead where they’re found
In a veil of great surprises; I wonder did you love me at all?

The only thing that keeps me from cutting my arm
Cross hatch, warm bath, Holiday Inn after dark
Signs and wonders: water stain writing the wall
Daniel’s message; blood of the moon on us all

Do I care if I despise this? Nothing else matters, I know
In a veil of great disguises; how do I live with your ghost?
The evil it spread like a fever ahead
It was night when you died, my firefly
What could I have said to raise you from the dead?
Oh could I be the sky on the Fourth of July?

Well you do enough talk
My little hawk, why do you cry?
Tell me what did you learn from the Tillamook burn?
Or the Fourth of July?
We’re all gonna die

Sitting at the bed with the halo at your head
Was it all a disguise, like Junior High
Where everything was fiction, future, and prediction
Now, where am I? My fading supply
Light struck from the lemon tree
What if I’d never seen hysterical light from Eugene?
Lemon yoghurt, remember I pulled at your shirt
I dropped the ashtray on the floor
I just wanted to be near you

Emerald Park, wonders never cease
The man who taught me to swim, he couldn't quite say my first name
Like a Father he led community water on my head
And he called me “Subaru”
And now I want to be near you
I’m drawn to the blood
The flight of a one-winged dove
How? How did this happen?
How? How did this happen?
Shall we beat this or celebrate it?
You’re not the one to talk things through
You checked your texts while I masturbated
Manelich, I feel so used
I should have known better
To see what I could see
My black shroud
Holding down my feelings
A pillar for my enemies

I should have wrote a letter
And grieve what I happen to grieve
My black shroud
I never trust my feelings
I waited for the remedy

When I was three, three maybe four
She left us at that video store
Be my rest, be my fantasy

I’m light as a feather
I’m bright as the Oregon breeze
My black shroud
Frightened by my feelings
I only wanna be a relief

No, I’m not a go-getter
The demon had a spell on me
My black shroud
Captain of my feelings
The only thing I wanna believe
Spirit of my silence I can hear you, but I'm afraid to be near you
And I don't know where to begin
And I don't know where to begin

Somewhere in the desert there's a forest, and an acre before us
But I don't know where to begin
But I don't know where to begin

Again I lost my strength completely, oh, be near me, tired old mare
With tIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you
If I was a dif-ferent man,
If I had blood in my-ay-ay-ay,eyes -
I could have read of your heart,
I could have read of your eyes -
But now I'm lonely as that,
I put up a fi-i-i-i-ight -
So pick up your battering ram -
Lo-o-o-o-o-ove, I wanna see it:

[chorus]
There's too much riding on that,
There's too much, too much, too much love.
There's too much riding on that,
There's too much, too much, too much love.
There's too much riding on that,
There's too much, too much, too much love.
There's too much riding on that anyway-eyay-ay

And maybe I talk too fast,
Maybe I talk too-o mu-u-uch -
Give me the sensitive laugh,
Or give me the sensiti-ive to-o-ouch -
Even if I could have kissed,
Even if I couldn't apply,
I'm so sorry I tried lo-o-o-o-o-ove, I wanna see it -

[chorus]
[words in background during this chorus:]
Too much love
Too much lo-o-o-ove
Too much love
Too much lo-o-o-ove
Too much love
Too much lo-o-o-ove
Too much love
Too much love
[background, also:] 'love' faintly
Tomorrow you'll see it through
The clouded out disguises put you in the room
And though I wandered out alone
A thousand lights abounded on our home
And I remember every sound it made
The clouded out disguises and the grave
So yeah I know I'm still afraid
Of letting go of choices I have made

All delighted people raise their hands

And I took you by the sleeve
No other reason than to be leading your leading man
And you woke up with a fright
Our lives depended on the visions through the night
All we had always, all we had always wanted to before
The hurricane inclined us, grappling on the floor

All delighted people raise their hands

Still the force of nature spurned
Ideas of strength and style abated by the burning basement

All delight people raise their hands

I'm not easily confused
The trouble with the storm inside us grew
But I had so much to give
In spite of all the terror and abuse

And the people bowed and prayed
And what difference does it make for you and me?

All delighted people raise their hands

And the people bowed and prayed
And what difference does it make?
It doesn't matter anyway
The world surrounds us with its hate

Hello darkness my old friend it breaks my heart
I've come to strangle you in spite of what you'd like
And don't be a rascal, don't be a laughing dog in spite of odds
All I'm deciphering from the spirits in the light within

All delighted people raise their hands

In restless dreams I walked alone I walked alive
The clouded out disguises left me in a dream of lightness

All delighted people raise their hands

And the people bowed and prayed
To the neon god they made
And what difference does it make?
I love you so much anyway
And on your breast I gently laid
Your arms surround me in the lake
I am joined with you forever

And the people bowed and prayed
And what difference does it make for you and me?

All delighted people raise their hands

I'm not easily confused
I feel alive I feel it glowing in the room

All delighted people raise their hands, all delighted people
All delighted people raise their hands, all delighted people
All delighted people raise their hands, all delighted people
All delighted people raise their hands, all delighted people

And the people bowed and prayed
Oh I love you a lot; Oh! I love you from the top of my heart
And what difference does it make?
I still love you a lot; Oh! I love you from the top of my heart
And on your breast I gently laid. Oh! My head in your arms
Do you love me from the top of your heart?
I tried my best I tried in vain. Do you love me a lot?
DoThere's nobody better than you
It took me a while till I knew
But you knew from the start it was us, didn't you?
It just took me a while till I knew

Now I lay as I study a blank wall
Would you spare me your voice if I call?
'Cause you waited and watered my heart till it grew
You just grew a little smarter too

So I don't blame you if you want to
Bury me in your memory, I'm not the girl I ought to be, but
Maybe when you tell your friends, you
Can tell them what you saw in me, and not how I turned out to be

There's some kind of burning inside me
It's kept me from falling apart
And I'm sure that you've seen what it's done to my heart
But it's kept me from falling apart
[Verse 1]
If I could, I'd be your little spoon
And kiss your fingers forevermore
But, big spoon, you have so much to do
And I have nothing ahead of me
You're the sun, you've never seen the night
But you hear its song from the morning birds
Well I'm not the moon, I'm not even a star
But awake at night I'll be singing to the birds
My God, I'm so lonely
So I open the window
To hear sounds of people
To hear sounds of people
Venus, planet of love
Was destroyed by global warming
Did its people want too much too?
Did its people want too much?

[Pre-Chorus]
And I don't want your pity
I just want somebody near me
Guess I'm a coward
I just want to feel alright
And I know no one will save me
I just need someone to kiss
Give me one good honest kiss
And I'll be alright

[Chorus]
Nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody
Ooh, nobody, nobody, nobody

[Verse 2]
I've been big and small and
Big and small and
Big and small again
And still nobody wants me
Still nobody wants me

[Pre-Cho[Verse 1]
The black hole of the window where you sleep
The night breeze carries something sweet
A peach tree
Wild women don't get the blues
But I find that
Lately I've been crying like a tall child

[Chorus]
So please, hurry, leave me, I can't breathe
Please don't say you love me
Mune ga hachikire-sōde
One word from you and I would
Jump off of this ledge I'm on, baby
Tell me "don't," so I can crawl back in
[Verse 1]
I don't know what to do without you
I don't know where to put my hands
I've been trying to lay my head down
But I'm writing this at 3 AM

[Chorus 1]
I don't need the world to see
That I've been the best I can be, but
I don't think I could stand to be
Where you don't see me
[Verse 1]
Happy came to visit me, he bought cookies on the way
I poured him tea and he told me it'll all be okay
Well I told him I'd do anything to have him stay with me
So he laid me down, and I felt Happy come inside of me
He laid me down, and I felt happy

[Chorus 1]
Oh if you're going, take the train
So I can hear it rumble, one last rumble
And when you go, take this heart
I'll make no more use of it when there's no more you

[Verse 2]
I was in the bathroom, I didn't hear him leave
I locked the door behind him and I turned around to see
All the cookie wrappers and the empty cups of tea
Well I sighed and mumbled to myself, again I have to clean
I sighed and mumbled to myself
[Verse]
You're my number one
You're the one I want
And I've turned down
Every hand that has beckoned me to come
You're my number one
You're the one I want
And I've turned down
Every hand that has beckoned me to come
I'm not doing anything
I'm not doing anything
My body's made of crushed little stars
And I'm not doing anything

I wanna see the whole world
I wanna see the whole world
I don't know how I'm gonna pay rent
I wanna see the whole world

Would you kill me, Jerusalem?
Kill me, Jerusalem
Kill me, Jerusalem
Come find me
[Verse 1]
Toss your dirty shoes in my washing machine heart
Baby, bang it up inside
I'm not wearing my usual lipstick
I thought maybe we would kiss tonight
Baby, will you kiss me already, and
Toss your dirty shoes in my washing machine heart
Baby, bang it up inside
[Verse 1]
I steal a few breaths from the world for a minute
And then I'll be nothing forever
And all of my memories
And all of the things I have seen will be gone
With my eyes, with my body, with me

[Chorus]
But me and my husband
We are doing better
It's always been just him and me
Together
So I bet all I have on that
Furrowed brow
And at least in this lifetime
We're sticking together
Me and my husband
We're sticking together
[Verse 1]
We nearly drowned
For such a silly thing
Someone who loves me now
Better than you
And that pretty friend is
Finally yours, and
I'll be around on Sunday, if
[Verse 1]
I call you, to see you again
So I can win, and this can finally end
Spend an hour on my makeup
To prove something
[Verse 1]
Does it smell like a school gymnasium in here?
It's funny how they're all the same
It's funny how you always remember
And we've both done it all a hundred times before
It's funny how I still forgot
[Verse 1]
I glow pink in the night in my room
I've been blossoming alone over you
And I hear my heart breaking tonight
I hear my heart breaking tonight
Do you hear it too?
It's like a summer shower
With every drop of rain singing
Verse 1]
I know that I ended it, but
Why won't you chase after me?
You know me better than I do
So
[Verse 1]
All of this turbulence wasn't forecasted
Apologies from the intercom
And I am relieved that I'd left my room tidy
They'll think of me kindly
When they come for my things
They'll never know how I'd stared at the dark in that room
With no thoughts
Like a blood-sniffing shark
And while my dreams made music in the night
Carefully
I was going to live
[Verse 1]
I gave too much of my heart tonight
Can you come to where I'm staying and make some extra love?
That I can save 'til tomorrow's show
[Verse 1]
I don't smoke
Except for when I'm missing you
To remember your mouth, how it
Tasted true
And I don't smoke
Except for after I've held you, baby
Being with you
Makes the flame burn good

[Chorus]
So if you need to be mean
Be mean to me
I can take it and put it inside of me
If your hands need to break
More than trinkets in your room
You can lean on my arm
As you break my heart
Verse 1]
I love everybody
Because I love you
When you stood up
Walked away, barefoot
And the grass where you lay
Left a bed in your shape
I looked over it
And I ached

[Verse 2]
I love everybody
Because I love you
I don't need the city, and I
Don't need proof
All I need, darling
Is a life in your shape
I picture it, soft
And I ache

[Pre-Chorus]
Look at you, strawberry blond

[Verse 3]
Reach out the car window
Trying to hold the wind
You tell me you love her;
I give you a grin
Oh all I ever wanted was a
Life in your shape
So I follow the white lines
Follow the while lines
Keep my eyes on the road
As I ache

[Chorus x2]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my way

[Chorus: Backing vocalists]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my wayVerse 1]
I love everybody
Because I love you
When you stood up
Walked away, barefoot
And the grass where you lay
Left a bed in your shape
I looked over it
And I ached

[Verse 2]
I love everybody
Because I love you
I don't need the city, and I
Don't need proof
All I need, darling
Is a life in your shape
I picture it, soft
And I ache

[Pre-Chorus]
Look at you, strawberry blond

[Verse 3]
Reach out the car window
Trying to hold the wind
You tell me you love her;
I give you a grin
Oh all I ever wanted was a
Life in your shape
So I follow the white lines
Follow the while lines
Keep my eyes on the road
As I ache

[Chorus x2]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my way

[Chorus: Backing vocalists]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my wayVerse 1]
I love everybody
Because I love you
When you stood up
Walked away, barefoot
And the grass where you lay
Left a bed in your shape
I looked over it
And I ached

[Verse 2]
I love everybody
Because I love you
I don't need the city, and I
Don't need proof
All I need, darling
Is a life in your shape
I picture it, soft
And I ache

[Pre-Chorus]
Look at you, strawberry blond

[Verse 3]
Reach out the car window
Trying to hold the wind
You tell me you love her;
I give you a grin
Oh all I ever wanted was a
Life in your shape
So I follow the white lines
Follow the while lines
Keep my eyes on the road
As I ache

[Chorus x2]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my way

[Chorus: Backing vocalists]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my wayVerse 1]
I love everybody
Because I love you
When you stood up
Walked away, barefoot
And the grass where you lay
Left a bed in your shape
I looked over it
And I ached

[Verse 2]
I love everybody
Because I love you
I don't need the city, and I
Don't need proof
All I need, darling
Is a life in your shape
I picture it, soft
And I ache

[Pre-Chorus]
Look at you, strawberry blond
It's beautiful out today
I wish you could take me upstate
To the little place you would tell me about
When you'd sense that I'd want to escape
Verse 1]
I'm beautiful, I know 'cause it's the season
But what am I to do with all this beauty?
Biology, I am an organism, I'm chemical
That's all, that is all

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall, capture me

[Verse 2]
Or at least take my picture
Kuzurete yuku maeni
I'm pulsing, my blood is red and unafraid of living
Beginning to end

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall

[Bridge]
How I feel this river rushing through my veins
With nowhere else to go, it circles 'round

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall, capture meVerse 1]
I'm beautiful, I know 'cause it's the season
But what am I to do with all this beauty?
Biology, I am an organism, I'm chemical
That's all, that is all

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall, capture me

[Verse 2]
Or at least take my picture
Kuzurete yuku maeni
I'm pulsing, my blood is red and unafraid of living
Beginning to end

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall

[Bridge]
How I feel this river rushing through my veins
With nowhere else to go, it circles 'round

[Hook]
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
And feel my skin is plump and full of life
I'm in my prime
I'm liquid smooth, come touch me, too
I'm at my highest peak, I'm ripe
About to fall, capture me
Texas is a land-locked state
It's a little bit far away
From the water, from the home that I've wanted to make
It somehow, in the city, you make it there and you make it
Anywhere, anywhere
But I've been anywhere and it's not what I want
I wanna be still with you

You keep your socks on in bed
Keep our hearth warm
"See the trees' shadows lie in black pools in the lawns"
You're the breeze in my Austin nights
You're the breeze in my Austin nights
You're the breeze in my Austin nights
[Verse 3]
Reach out the car window
Trying to hold the wind
You tell me you love her;
I give you a grin
Oh all I ever wanted was a
Life in your shape
So I follow the white lines
Follow the while lines
Keep my eyes on the road
As I ache

[Chorus x2]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my way

[Chorus: Backing vocalists]
Look at you, strawberry blond
Fields rolling on
I love it when you call my name
Can you hear the bumblebees swarm?
Watching your arm
I love it when you look my way
[Verse 2]
I'm what's left of when we
Swam under the moon
Now the rest of my days are just
Waiting for when
You come down and tell me
I was meant for you, baby
Being with you
Makes the flame burn good

[Chorus]
If you need to be mean
Be mean to me
I can take it and put it inside of me
If your hands need to break
More than trinkets in your room
You can lean on my arm
As you break my heart

Just don't leave me alone
Wondering where you are
I am stronger than you give me
Credit for

If your hands need to break
More than trinkets in your room
You can lean on my arm
As you break my heart
[Pre-Chorus]
'Cause I need somebody to remember my name
After all that I can do for them is done
I need someone to remember me

[Chorus]
I need something bigger than the sky
Hold it in my arms and know it's mine
Just how many stars will I need to hang around me
To finally call it heaven?

[Pre-Chorus]
I need somebody to remember my name
After all that I can do for them is done
I need someone to remember me

[Chorus]
I need something bigger than the sky
Hold it in my arms and know it's mine
Just how many stars will I need to hang around me
To finally get somewhere I can be all done
Somewhere like heaven
[Verse 2]
You wouldn't leave till we loved in the morning
You'd learned from movies how love ought to be
And you'd say you love me and look in my eyes
But I know through mine you were
Looking in yours
And did you know the liberty bell is a replica
Silently housed in its original walls
And while its dreams played music in the night
Quietly
It was told to believe

[Verse 3]
I always wanted to die clean and pretty
But I'd be too busy on working days
So I am relieved that the turbulence wasn't forecasted
I couldn't have changed anyways
I am relieved that I'd left my room tidy
Goodbye
[Chorus 1]
Why didn't you stop me?
Why didn't you stop me
And paint it over?

[Verse 2]
I look for a picture of you
To keep in my pocket
But I can't seem to find one
Where you

[Chorus 2]
Look how I remember
Look how I remember
Look how I remember
Paint it over
[Chorus 1]
"I love you, I love you, I love you
I love you, I love you, I love you
I love you, I love you, I love you"

[Verse 2]
I could stare at your back all day
I could stare at your back all day
And I know I've kissed you before, but
I didn't do it right

[Chorus 2]
Can I try again, try again, try again
Try again, and again, and again
And again, and again, and again?
[Chorus]
It would be a hundred times easier
If we were young again
But as it is and it is
We're just two slow dancers, last ones out
We're two slow dancers, last ones out

[Verse 2]
And the ground has been slowly pulling us back down
You see it on both our skin
We get a few years and then it wants us back

[Chorus]
It would be a hundred times easier
If we were young again
But as it is
And it is
To think that we could stay the same
To think that we could stay the same
To think that we could stay the same
But we're two slow dancers, last ones out
We're two slow dancers, last ones out
Two slow dancers, last ones out
[Verse 2]
Walk up in my high heels
All high and mighty
And you say "Hello"
And I lose

[Bridge]
'Cause nobody butters me up like you, and
Nobody fucks me like me

[Verse 3]
In the morning, in a taxi
I'm so very paying for

[Chorus]
Why am I lonely for lonesome love?
Why am I lonely for lonesome love?
Why am I lonely?
[Chorus]
You'll meet me at Blue Diner
I'll take coffee and talk about nothing, baby
At Blue Diner, I'll take anything you want to give me, baby

[Verse 2]
I haven't told anyone
Just like we promised
Have you?
Every time I drive through the city where you're from
I squeeze a little

[Chorus]
Meet me at Blue Diner
I'll take coffee and talk about nothing, baby
At Blue Diner, I'll take anything you want to give me, baby
At Blue Diner, I'll take coffee and talk about nothing, baby
Blue Diner, I'll take anything you want to give me, baby
[Verse 2]
And I'm the idiot with the painted face
In the corner, taking up space
But when he walks in, I am loved, I am loved

[Chorus]
Me and my husband
We are doing better
It's always been just him and me
Together
So I bet all I have on that
Furrowed brow
And at least in this lifetime
We're sticking together
Me and my husband
We're sticking together
Me and my husband
We are doing better
[Verse 2]
Baby, though I've closed my eyes
I know who you pretend I am
I know who you pretend I am

[Chorus]
But do mi ti
Why not me?
Why not me?
Do mi ti
Why not me?
Why not me?
Do mi ti
Why not me?
Why not me?
I better ace that interview
I better ace that interview
I should tell them that I'm not afraid to die
I better ace that interview

Uh
I work better under a deadline
I work better under a deadline
I pick an age when I'm gonna disappear
Until then I can try again
Until then I can try again

Kill me, Jerusalem
Kill me, Jerusalem
Kill me, Jerusalem
Go and kill me
[Pre-Chorus]
'Cause you're the one I got
You're the one I got
So I'll keep turning down the hands
That beckon me to come

[Chorus]
Though I'm a geyser, feel it bubbling from below
Hear it call, hear it call, hear it call to me, constantly
And hear the harmony only when it's harming me
It's not real, it's not real, it's not real enough

[Outro]
But I will be the one you need
The way I can't be without you
I will be the one you need
I just can't be without you
[Chorus 1]
If you're going, take the train
So I can hear it rumble, one last rumble
And when you go, take this heart
I'll make no more use of it when there's no more you

[Chorus 2]
And if you're going, take the moon
Then maybe I will see you, in the night I'll see you
And when you go, take this heart
I'll make no more use of it when there's no more you
[Verse 2]
On sunny days, I go out walking
I end up on a tree-lined street
I look up at the gaps of sunlight
I miss you more than anything

[Chorus 1]
I don't need the world to see
That I've been the best I can be, but
I don't think I could stand to be
Where you don't see me

[Chorus 2]
And autumn comes when you're not yet done
With the summer passing by, but
I don't think I could stand to be
Where you don't see me
[Verse 2]
And I was so young when I behaved twenty five
Yet now I find I've grown into a tall child
And I don't wanna go home yet
Let me walk to the top of the big night sky

[Chorus]
So please, hurry, leave me, I can't breathe
Please don't say you love me
Mune ga hachikire-sōde
One word from you and I would
Jump off of this ledge I'm on, baby
Tell me "don't," so I can crawl back in

[Outro]
One word from you and I would
Jump off of this ledge I'm on, baby
Tell me "don't," so I can crawl back in
Please, hurry, leave me, I can't breatherus]
And I know no one will save me
I'm just asking for a kiss
Give me one good movie kiss
And I'll be alright

[Chorus]
Nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody
Ooh, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody, nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody
Nobody, nobody, no
[Pre-Chorus]
Don't wait for me, I can't come

[Chorus]
Your mother wouldn't approve of how my mother raised me
But I do, I think I do
And you're an all-American boy
I guess I couldn't help trying to be your best American girl

[Verse 2]
You're the one
You're all I ever wanted
I think I'll regret this

[Chorus]
Your mother wouldn't approve of how my mother raised me
But I do, I finally do
And you're an all-American boy
I guess I couldn't help trying to be the best American girl
Your mother wouldn't approve of how my mother raised me
But I do, I think I do
Now here I lay, as I wonder about you
Would you just tell me what I'm meant to do?
'Cause I've waited and watered my heart till it grew
You can see how it's blossomed for you

And I don't blame you if you want to
Bury me in your memory, I'm not the girl I ought to be, but
Maybe when you tell your friends, you
Can tell them what you saw in me, and not the way I am

And I don't mean to make your heart blue
But could we be what we're meant to be?
I'm just about to beg you please, and
Then when you tell your friends, you can
Tell them what you saw in me, and
Not the way I used to be

'Cause there's nobody better than you.
And the people bowed and prayed
Oh! I love you a lot; Oh! I love you from the top of my heart
And you can see through my mistakes
Oh! I'll tell it to you now; Oh! I'll tell it from the top of my heart
When your heirloom's wilted brown
When the devil's pushing down
When your mourning has a sound
And you hesitate to laugh
How quickly will your joy pass
How quickly will your joy pass

And when you walk inside I feel the door
I'll never let it push your arms no more
And when your legs give out just lie right down
And I will kiss you till your breath is found
And when you walk inside I feel the door
I'll never let it push your arms no more

So do you think I came to fight?
And do I always think I'm right?
Oh no I never meant to be a pest to anyone this time
Oh no I only meant to be a friend to everyone this time

And what difference does it make
If the world is a mess; if the world is a mess?
And on your breast I gently laid
Oh! I'll tell it to you now; Oh! I'll tell it to you now

When the world's come and gone shall we follow our transgressions
Or shall we stand strong?

I tried to save the things I made
Oh! But the world is a mess, Oh! But the world is a mess
And what difference does it make if the world is a mess?
If the world is a mess!
I tried my best I tried in vain
Oh! But the world is a mess! Oh! But the world is a mess!

Suffer not the child among you or shall you die young
when the world's come and gone
Suffer not the child among you or shall you die young
when the world's come and gone

[chorus again, in the same way as above]

[this is background, at x2 Sufjan comes in with 'There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that' x4]
Na, na na, na, na, na, na [x6]
Meanwhile, another singer is singing:
'La-aaia-a-aaia' [x6]

[music interlude]

[there's background singers singing 'La' over and over in descending keys a few beats before singing, and it continues until a few beats before he ends]
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that word ...

[music interlude]

[this is semi-in the background]
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that,
There's too much riding on that, there's too much riding on that.
And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devicesIt's been a long, long time since I've memorized your face
It's been four hours now since I've wandered through your place
And when I sleep on your couch I feel very safe
And when you bring the blankets I cover up my face
I do love you
I do love you

And when you play guitar I listen to the strings buzz
The metal vibrates underneath your fingers
And when you crochet I feel mesmerized and proud
And I would say I love you, but saying it out loud is hard
So I won't say it at all
And I won't stay very long
But you are the life I needed all along 
I think of you as my brother
Although that sounds dumb
Words are futile devices
Amethyst and flowers on the table, is it real or a fable?
Well, I suppose a friend is a friend
And we all know how this will end

Chimney swift that finds me be my keeper,
Silhouette of the cedar
What is that song you sing for the dead?
What is that song you sing for the dead?

I see the signal searchlight strike me in the window of my room
Well, I got nothing to prove
Well, I got nothing to prove

I forgive you, mother, I can hear you,
And I long to be near you
But every road leads to an end
Yes, every road leads to an end

Your apparition passes through me in the willows and five red hens
You'll never see us again
You'll never see us again
When I was three, and free to explore
I saw her face on the back of the door
Be my rest, be my fantasy

I should have known better
Nothing can be changed
The past is still the past
The bridge to nowhere
I should have wrote a letter
Explaining what I feel, that empty feeling

Don’t back down, concentrate on seeing
The breakers in the bar, the neighbor’s greeting
My brother had a daughter
The beauty that she brings, illumination

Don’t back down, there is nothing left
The breakers in the bar, no reason to live
I’m a fool in the fetter
Rose of Aaron’s beard, where you can reach me

Don’t back down: nothing can be changed
Cantilever bridge, the drunken sailor
My brother had a daughter
The beauty that she brings, illumination
Found myself on Spencer’s Butte
Traced your shadow with my shoe
Empty outline changed my view
Now all of me thinks less of you

On the sheet I see your horizon
All of me pressed onto you
But in this light you look like Poseidon
I’m just a ghost you walk right through

Saw myself on Spencer’s Butte (All of me wants all of you)
Landscape changed my point of view (All of me wants all of you)
Revelation may come true (All of me wants all of you)
Now all of me thinks less of you (All of me wants all of you)

(All of me wants all of you)
The strength of his arm
My lover caught me off guard
How? Head of a rabbit
How? Head of a rabbit

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this?

With blood on my sleeve
Delilah, avenge my grief
How? God of Elijah
How? God of Elijah

As fire to the sun
Tell me what I have done
How? Heart of a dragon
How? Heart of a dragon

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this now?
How did this happen?
Since I was old enough to speak I've said it with alarm
Some part of me was lost in your sleeve
Where you hid your cigarettes
No I’ll never forget
I just want to be near you

Still I pray to what I cannot see
In the sprinkler I mark the evidence known from the start
From the bed near your death, and all the machines that made a mess
Far away the falcon flew
Now I want to be near you

What’s left is only bittersweet
For the rest of my life, admitting the best is behind me
Now I’m drunk and afraid, wishing the world would go away
What’s the point of singing songs
If they’ll never even hear you?
Did you get enough love, my little dove
Why do you cry?
And I’m sorry I left, but it was for the best
Though it never felt right
My little Versailles

The hospital asked should the body be cast
Before I say goodbye, my star in the sky
Such a funny thought to wrap you up in cloth
Do you find it all right, my dragonfly?

Shall we look at the moon, my little loon
Why do you cry?
Make the most of your life, while it is rife
While it is light

Well you do enough talk
My little hawk, why do you cry?
Tell me what did you learn from the Tillamook burn?
Or the Fourth of July?
We’re all gonna die
Should I tear my eyes out now?
Everything I see returns to you somehow
Should I tear my heart out now?
Everything I feel returns to you somehow
I want to save you from your sorrow

The only reason why I continue at all
Faith in reason, I wasted my life playing dumb
Signs and wonders: sea lion caves in the dark
Blind faith, God’s grace, nothing else left to impart

Do I care if I survive this, bury the dead where they’re found
In a veil of great surprises; hold to my head till I drown
Should I tear my eyes out now, before I see too much?
Should I tear my arms out now, I wanna feel your touch

Should I tear my eyes out now?
Everything I see returns to you somehow
Should I tear my heart out now?
Everything I feel returns to you somehow
Carried by stones
Fairyland all around us
Like a dead horse
Sign of your children’s fever

Carrie, come home
(Thorazine’s friend)
Holding your hands with Opai
Like a dead horse
(Shall we ascend)
Flight of the mayfly
Ephemera on my back
She breaks my arm
y breath
My tongue on your chest
What can be said of my heart?
If history speaks, the kiss on my cheek
Where there remains but a mark
Beloved my John, so I’ll carry on
Counting my cards down to one
And when I am dead, come visit my bed
My fossil is bright in the sun

So can we contend, peacefully
Before my history ends?
Jesus I need you, be near me, come shield me
From fossils that fall on my head
There’s only a shadow of me; in a manner of speaking I'm dead

Now that I fell into your arms
My only lover
Give out to give in
I search for the capsule I lost

Drag me to hell
In the valley of The Dalles
Like my mother
Give wings to a stone
It's only the shadow of a cross

I slept on my back
In the shade of the meadowlark
Like a champion
Get drunk to get laid
I take one more hit when you depart

I'll drive that stake through the center of my heart
Lonely vampire
Inhaling it's fire
I'm chasing the dragon too far

There's blood on that blade
Fuck me, I'm falling apart
My assassin
Like Casper the ghost
There's no shade in the shadow of the cross

Innocence was never lost
Though it may have been insulted
Even if the Earth forgot
Her inheritance resulted
In contradiction, ceremony
Benediction, hallelujah

There are no more accidents
Living things refuse to offer
Explanations of their worth
We in turn avenge the Author
With paranoia and prediction
Exploration, competition
Ceremony, inner anguish
Consequences, hallelujah

Oh, hallelujah
Oh, hallelujah
Oh, hallelujah
Oh, hallelujah
My blue bucket of gold
Friend, why don’t you love me?
Once the myth has been told
The lens deforms it as lightning

Raise your right hand
Tell me you want me in your life
Or raise your red flag
Just when I want you in my life

Search for things to extol
Friend, the fables delight me
My blue bucket of gold
Lord, touch me with lightning

Raise your right hand
Tell me you want me in your life
Or raise your red flag
Just when I want you in my life

Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive
Run, mission, run
Before we arrive

























ll that I've known to be of life
And I'm gentle
You ran off with it all
And I'm faithful
All that I've held within my arms
And I'm weightless
You ran off with it all
And I'm speechless
All that I've said to get it right
And I'm confident
You ran off with it all

And I'm steadfast
All that I thought, to be precise
And I'm consequence
You ran off with it all
And I'm sorry

And I'm sorry
All that I've known to be at peace
And I'm desperate
You ran off with it all
And I'm restless
All that I've known to be of love
And I'm gentle
You ran off with it all
And I'm desperate
All that I dreamed
Where do you run, where do you run to?
And I'm evidenced
All that I dreamed
Where do you run, where do you run to?
And I'm faithless
All that I dreamed
Where do you run, where do you run to?
And I messed up
All that I dreamed
Where do you run, where do you run to?
Carry on friends
Where do you run?
I'm a walker, I'm a drinker
Safeway shopper, thunder egg reader
I'm a biker, yeah, I'm a beaver
Web-foot walker, trailblazing fever
I'm a lover, yeah, I'm a reaper
Subaru driver, satellite receiver
I'm a trucker, yeah, I'm a chaser
Pig-n-Ford rider, I'm a Nike racer

Gloria in ex-Canemah
Gloria in ex-Canemah


















I have loved you for the last time
Visions of Gideon, visions of Gideon
And I have kissed you for the last time
Visions of Gideon, visions of Gideon

For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Is it a video? (Is it a video?) Is it a video? (Is it a video?)
For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Is it a video? (Is it a video?) Is it a video? (Is it a video?)
For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Visions of Gideon (visions of Gideon), visions of Gideon (visions of Gideon)
For the love, for laughter, I flew up to your arms
Visions of Gideon (visions of Gideon), visions of Gideon (visions of Gideon), visions of Gideon

Visions of Gideon, visions of Gideon, visions of Gideon...
Visions of Gideon (Is it a video?), visions of Gideon (Is it a video?), visions of Gideon...
Is it a video?...
Oh, woah woe is me
I'm running like a plover
Now I'm prone to misery
The birthmark on your shoulder reminds me

How much sorrow can I take?
Blackbird on my shoulder
And what difference does it make
When this love is over?
Shall I sleep within your bed
River of unhappiness
Hold your hands upon my head
Till I breathe my last breath

Oh, woah woe is me
The last time that you touched me
Oh, will wonders ever cease?
Blessed be the mystery of love
I'm drawn to the blood
The flight of a one-winged dove
How? How did this happen?
How? How did this happen?

The strength of his arm
The father of my last child
How? Head of a rabbit
How? Head of a rabbit

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this?

With blood on my sleeve
Delilah, avenge my grief
How? God of Elijah
How? God of Elijah

As fire to the sun
Tell me what I have done
How? Heart of a dragon
How? Heart of a dragon

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this now?
(What did I do to deserve this now?)
How did this happen?

How did this happen? [x18]
(What did I do)




What the water wants is hurricanes
And sailboats to ride on its back
What the water wants is sun kiss
And land to run into and back

I have a fish stone burning my elbow
Reminding me to know that I'm glad
That I have a bottle filled with my old teeth
They fell out like a tear in the bag

And I have a sister somewhere in Detroit
She has black hair and small hands
And I have a kettledrum
I'll hit the earth with you

And I will crochet you a hat
And I have a red kite
I'll put you right in it
I'll show you the sky
Worth a righteous one
Take up on the wood
Put it on your son

Lake or lamb
There is none to harm
When the angel came
You had raised your arm

Abraham
Put off on your son
Take instead the ram
Until Jesus comes
"In The Devil's Territory"

Be still and know your sign
The beast will arrive in time
We stayed a long, long time
We stayed a long, long time

To see you
To beat you
To see you
At last

I saw the dragons drying
I saw the witches whine
We stayed a long, long time
But I'm not afraid to die

To see you
To meet you
To see you
At last

I stole my father's shoes
I pulled his pockets too
We stayed a long, long time
We stayed a long, long time

To see you
To beat you
To see you
To meet you

To see you
At last



"The Dress Looks Nice On You"

I can see a lot of life in you
I can see a lot of bright in you
And I think the dress looks nice on you
I can see a lot of life in you

I can see a bed and make it too
I can see a fireside turn blue
And I can see the lot of life in you
Yes, I can see a lot of life in you

When the world looks back
when the face looks after that
I can see a lot of life in you
Yes, I can see a lot of life in you

I can see a lot of life in you
I can see your bed and make it too
And I think the dress looks nice on you
Yes, I can see a lot of life in you

I can see a lot of life in you
Yes, I can see a lot of life in you

I'm drawn to the blood
The flight of a one-winged dove
How? How did this happen?
How? How did this happen?

The strength of his arm
The father of my last child
How? Head of a rabbit
How? Head of a rabbit

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this?

With blood on my sleeve
Delilah, avenge my grief
How? God of Elijah
How? God of Elijah

As fire to the sun
Tell me what I have done
How? Heart of a dragon
How? Heart of a dragon

For my prayer has always been love
What did I do to deserve this now?
(What did I do to deserve this now?)
How did this happen?

How did this happen? [x18]
(What did I do)


It was too hot to make love if you can imagine that except under water and I was never very good at that,” he wrote to Dietrich in a November 1951 note from Cuba, one of 30 letters he wrote her from 1949 to 1959, reflecting their deeply intimate, flirtatious, yet apparently platonic relationship.

“They adored each other, but there was no sexual thing,” said Dietrich’s daughter, Maria Riva. “They were buddies, they were friends, they were comrades in arms.”





Diego.
Truth is, so great, that I wouldn’t like to speak, or sleep, or listen, or love. To feel myself trapped, with no fear of blood, outside time and magic, within your own fear, and your great anguish, and within the very beating of your heart. All this madness, if I asked it of you, I know, in your silence, there would be only confusion. I ask you for violence, in the nonsense, and you, you give me grace, your light and your warmth. I’d like to paint you, but there are no colors, because there are so many, in my confusion, the tangible form of my great love.

F.



Diego:

Nothing compares to your hands, nothing like the green-gold of your eyes. My body is filled with you for days and days. you are the mirror of the night. the violent flash of lightning. the dampness of the earth. The hollow of your armpits is my shelter. my fingers touch your blood. All my joy is to feel life spring from your flower-fountain that mine keeps to fill all the paths of my nerves which are yours.



Auxochrome — Chromophore. Diego.

She who wears the color.
He who sees the color.
Since the year 1922.

Until always and forever. Now in 1944. After all the hours lived through. The vectors continue in their original direction. Nothing stops them. With no more knowledge than live emotion. With no other wish than to go on until they meet. Slowly. With great unease, but with the certainty that all is guided by the “golden section.” There is cellular arrangement. There is movement. There is light. All centers are the same. Folly doesn’t exist. We are the same as we were and as we will be. Not counting on idiotic destiny.



My Diego:

Mirror of the night

Your eyes green swords inside my flesh. waves between our hands.

All of you in a space full of sounds — in the shade and in the light. You were called AUXOCHROME the one who captures color. I CHROMOPHORE — the one who gives color.

You are all the combinations of numbers. life. My wish is to understand lines form shades movement. You fulfill and I receive. Your word travels the entirety of space and reaches my cells which are my stars then goes to yours which are my light.




Nordstrom belongs to the last generation of devoted letter writers. She took immense pleasure in the act, often writing to authors when there was no obvious necessity of doing so, except for the all-important necessity of keeping a ‘channel open’ to them. Although she naturally did much of her editorial work with local authors in person or by phone, she also sent long, funny, perceptive letters to those with whom she had just spoken by telephone or just that day met for lunch. Time and again, she simply could not resist the temptation to write.”

Dear Thom:

We had your letter this morning. I will answer it from my point of view and of course Elaine will from hers.

First — if you are in love — that’s a good thing — that’s about the best thing that can happen to anyone. Don’t let anyone make it small or light to you.

Second — There are several kinds of love. One is a selfish, mean, grasping, egotistical thing which uses love for self-importance. This is the ugly and crippling kind. The other is an outpouring of everything good in you — of kindness and consideration and respect — not only the social respect of manners but the greater respect which is recognition of another person as unique and valuable. The first kind can make you sick and small and weak but the second can release in you strength, and courage and goodness and even wisdom you didn’t know you had.

You say this is not puppy love. If you feel so deeply — of course it isn’t puppy love.

But I don’t think you were asking me what you feel. You know better than anyone. What you wanted me to help you with is what to do about it — and that I can tell you.

Glory in it for one thing and be very glad and grateful for it.

The object of love is the best and most beautiful. Try to live up to it.

If you love someone — there is no possible harm in saying so — only you must remember that some people are very shy and sometimes the saying must take that shyness into consideration.

Girls have a way of knowing or feeling what you feel, but they usually like to hear it also.

It sometimes happens that what you feel is not returned for one reason or another — but that does not make your feeling less valuable and good.

Lastly, I know your feeling because I have it and I’m glad you have it.

We will be glad to meet Susan. She will be very welcome. But Elaine will make all such arrangements because that is her province and she will be very glad to. She knows about love too and maybe she can give you more help than I can.

And don’t worry about losing. If it is right, it happens — The main thing is not to hurry. Nothing good gets away.

Love,


She was sitting on the floor in her red velvet jacket & red striped silk shirt, I knotting her pearls into heaps of great clustered eggs. She had come up to see me – so we go on – a spirited, creditable affair, I think, innocent (spiritually) & all gain, I think, rather a bore for Leonard, but not enough to worry him. The truth is one has room for a good many relationships.

Fa
his is the theory… that anything that is art… is presumably about some certain thing, but is really always about something else, and it’s no good having one without the other, because if you just have the something it is boring and if you just have the something else it’s irritating.”
Dear Maurice:

Dearest — my body is simply crazy with wanting you — If you don’t come tomorrow — I don’t see how I can wait for you — I wonder if your body wants mine the way mine wants yours — the kisses — the hotness — the wetness — all melting together — the being held so tight that it hurts — the strangle and the struggle.”

I’ve wanted to write you a note and tell you over the ‘phone that your new ideas for the ending of Kenny’s Window seem wonderful to me, and I’m sure it’s going to be a beautiful book. Keep working on it and when you have all the chapters together, you and I can go over it word for word, and get down to brass tacks, you should forgive the originality of my prose style. But the main thing is: thanks for everything I am sure you are doing to the book. The pages you showed me the other day in the Vanderbilt made me very very very happy.

As for your color pictures for the Krauss book — words are no good whatsoever. There are a few peaks in an editor’s life, and seeing those pictures of yours has been a peak of mine. They are indescribably lovely and absolutely perfect and — well, pure in the best sense.”
Auxochrome — Chromophore

It was the thirst of many years restrained in our body. Chained words which we could not say except on the lips of dreams. Everything was surrounded by the green miracle of the landscape of your body. Upon your form, the lashes of the flowers responded to my touch, the murmur of streams. There was all manner of fruits in the juice of your lips, the blood of the pomegranate, the horizon of the mammee and the purified pineapple. I pressed you against my breast and the prodigy of your form penetrated all my blood through the tips of my fingers. Smell of oak essence, memories of walnut, green breath of ash tree. Horizon and landscapes = I traced them with a kiss. Oblivion of words will form the exact language for understanding the glances of our closed eyes. = You are here, intangible and you are all the universe which I shape into the space of my room. Your absence springs trembling in the ticking of the clock, in the pulse of light; you breathe through the mirror. From you to my hands, I caress your entire body, and I am with you for a minute and I am with myself for a moment. And my blood is the miracle which runs in the vessels of the air from my heart to yours.

The green miracle of the landscape of my body becomes in your the whole of nature. I fly through it to caress the rounded hills with my fingertips, my hands sink into the shadowy valleys in an urge to possess and I’m enveloped in the embrace of gentle branches, green and cool. I penetrate the sex of the whole earth, her heat chars me and my entire body is rubbed by the freshness of the tender leaves. Their dew is the sweat of an ever-new lover.

It’s not love, or tenderness, or affection, it’s life itself, my life, that I found what I saw it in your hands, in your month and in your breasts. I have the taste of almonds from your lips in my mouth. Our worlds have never gone outside. Only one mountain can know the core of another mountain.

Your presence floats for a moment or two as if wrapping my whole being in an anxious wait for the morning. I notice that I’m with you. At that instant still full of sensations, my hands are sunk in oranges, and my body feels surrounded by your arms.



For my Diego

the silent life giver of worlds, what is most important is the nonillusion. morning breaks, the friendly reds, the big blues, hands full of leaves, noisy birds, fingers in the hair, pigeons’ nests a rare understanding of human struggle simplicity of the senseless song the folly of the wind in my heart = don’t let them rhyme girl = sweet xocolatl [chocolate] of ancient Mexico, storm in the blood that comes in through the mouth — convulsion, omen, laughter and sheer teeth needles of pearl, for some gift on a seventh of July, I ask for it, I get it, I sing, sang, I’ll sing from now on our magic — love.

























“Since I left you, I have been constantly depressed. My happiness is to be near you. Incessantly I live over in my memory your caresses, your tears, your affectionate solicitude. The charms of the incomparable Josephine kindle continually a burning and a glowing flame in my heart. When, free from all solicitude, all harassing care, shall I be able to pass all my time with you, having only to love you, and to think only of the happiness of so saying, and of proving it to you

A precious, mouldering pleasure 't is

To meet an antique book,

In just the dress his century wore;

A privilege, I think,

His venerable hand to take,

And warming in our own,

A passage back, or two, to make

To times when he was young.

His quaint opinions to inspect,

His knowledge to unfold

On what concerns our mutual mind,

The literature of old;

What interested scholars most,

What competitions ran

When Plato was a certainty.

And Sophocles a man;

When Sappho was a living girl,

And Beatrice wore

The gown that Dante deified.

Facts, centuries before,

He traverses familiar,

As one should come to town

And tell you all your dreams were true;

He lived where dreams were sown.

His presence is enchantment,

You beg him not to go;

Old volumes shake their vellum heads

And tantalize, just so.


SUCCESS.

[Published in "A Masque of Poets" at the request of "H.H.," the author's fellow-townswoman and friend.]

Success is counted sweetest

By those who ne'er succeed.

To comprehend a nectar

Requires sorest need.

Not one of all the purple host

Who took the flag to-day

Can tell the definition,

So clear, of victory,

As he, defeated, dying,

On whose forbidden ear

The distant strains of triumph

Break, agonized and clear!



All trials are trials for one’s life, just as all sentences are sentences of death, and three times I have been tried. The first time I left the box to be arrested, the second time to be led back to the house of detention, and the third time to pass into prison for two years. Society as we have constituted it, will have no place for me, has none to offer; but Nature, whose sweet rains fall on just and unjust alike, will have clefts in the rocks where I may hide, and secret valleys in whose silence I may weep undisturbed. She will hang with stars so that I may walk abroad in the darkness without stumbling, and send the wind over my footprints so that none may track me to my hurt: she will cleanse me in great waters, and with bitter herbs make me whole



Your letter from Trieste came this morning—But why do you think I don’t feel, or that I make phrases? ‘Lovely phrases’ you say which rob things of reality. Just the opposite. Always, always, always I try to say what I feel. Will you then believe that after you went last Tuesday—exactly a week ago—out I went into the slums of Bloomsbury, to find a barrel organ. But it did not make me cheerful … And ever since, nothing important has happened—Somehow its dull and damp. I have been dull; I have missed you. I do miss you. I shall miss you. And if you don’t believe it, you’re a longeared owl and ass. Lovely phrases? …

But of course (to return to your letter) I always knew about your standoffishness. Only I said to myself, I insist upon kindness. With this aim in view, I came to Long Barn. Open the top button of your jersey and you will see, nestling inside, a lively squirrel with the most inquisitive habits, but a dear creature all the same—




I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your un-dumb letters, would never write so elementary phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it would lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is just really a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this—But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defences. And I don’t really resent it …

Please forgive me for writing such a miserable letter.I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your un-dumb letters, would never write so elementary phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it would lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is just really a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this—But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defences. And I don’t really resent it …

Please forgive me for writing such a miserable letter.I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your un-dumb letters, would never write so elementary phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it would lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is just really a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this—But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defences. And I don’t really resent it …

Please forgive me for writing such a miserable letter.I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your un-dumb letters, would never write so elementary phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it would lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is just really a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this—But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defences. And I don’t really resent it …

Please forgive me for writing such a miserable letter.I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your un-dumb letters, would never write so elementary phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it would lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is just really a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any the more by giving myself away like this—But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defences. And I don’t really resent it …

Please forgive me for writing such a miserable letter.



I am reduced to a thing that wants Virginia. I composed a beautiful letter to you in the sleepless nightmare hours of the night, and it has all gone: I just miss you, in a quite simple desperate human way. You, with all your undumb letters, would never write so elementary a phrase as that; perhaps you wouldn’t even feel it. And yet I believe you’ll be sensible of a little gap. But you’d clothe it in so exquisite a phrase that it should lose a little of its reality. Whereas with me it is quite stark: I miss you even more than I could have believed; and I was prepared to miss you a good deal. So this letter is really just a squeal of pain. It is incredible how essential to me you have become. I suppose you are accustomed to people saying these things. Damn you, spoilt creature; I shan’t make you love me any more by giving myself away like this — But oh my dear, I can’t be clever and stand-offish with you: I love you too much for that. Too truly. You have no idea how stand-offish I can be with people I don’t love. I have brought it to a fine art. But you have broken down my defenses. And I don’t really resent it."








 375 

Was Santiago doomed. Ilis cliancc had come; 

 swooped upon it, plundered it, and was gone, 

Leaving the treacherous isle a desolate heap 

Of smoking ashes in the leaden sea, 

While onward all those pirate bowsprits plunged 

Into the golden West, across the broad 

Atlantic once again; ''I'or I will show," 

Said Drake, "that Englishmen henceforth will sail 

Old ocean where thej^ will." Onward they surged, 

And the great glittering crested majestic waves 

Jul)ilantly rushed up to meet the keels, 

And there was nought around them but the gicy 

Ruin and roar of the huge Atlantic seas, 

Grey mounded seas, pursuing and pursued, 

That fl}', hounded and hounding on for ever, 

From empty marge to marge of the grey sky. 

Over the wandering wilderness of foam. 

Onward, through storm and death,  swept; for no^\' 

Once more a fell plague gripped the tossing ships, 

And not by twos and threes as heretofore 

His crews were minished; but in three black days 

Three hundred seamen in their shotted shrouds 

Were cast into the deep. Onward he swept, 

Implacably^ having in mind to strike 

Spain in the throat at St. Domingo, port 

Of Hispaniola, a city of far renown, 

A jewel on the shores of old romance, 

Palm-shadowed, gated with immortal gold, 

Queen city of Spain's dominions over sea, 

And guarded by great guns. Out of the da^vn 

The pirate ships came leaping, grim and black, 

And ere the Spaniards were awake, the flag 

Of England floated from their topmost tower. 

But since he had not troops enough to hold 

So great a city,  entrenched his men 

Within the Plaza and held the batteries. 

Thence he demanded ransom, and sent out 

A boy with flag of truce. The boy's return 

 waited long. Under a sheltering palm 

He stood, watching the enemies' camp, and lo, 

Along the hot white purple-shadowed road 



376  

ToVrds him, a crawling shape writhed through the dust 

Up to his feet, a shape besmeared with blood, 

A shape that held the stumps up of its wrists 

And moaned, an eyeless thing, a naked rag 

Of flesh obscenely mangled, a small face 

Hideously puckered, shrivelled like a monkey's 

With lips drawn backward from its teeth. 

"Speak, speak. 
In God's name, speak, what art thou?" whispered Drake, 
And a sharp cry came, answering his dread, 
A cry as of a sea-bird in the wind 
Desolately astray from all earth's shores, 
"Captain, I am thy boy, only thy boy! 
See, see, my captain, see what they have done! 
Captain, I only bore the flag; I only " 



"0, lad, lad, lad," moaned Drake, and, stooping, strove 
To pillow the mangled head upon his arm. 
" What have they done to thee, what have they done?" 
And at the touch the boy screamed, once, and died. 



Then like a savage sea with arms uplift 

To heaven the wrath of  blazed thundermg, 

"Eternal God, be this the doom of Spain! 

Henceforward have no pity. Send the strength 

Of Thy great seas into my soul that I 

May devastate this empire, this red hell 

They make of Thy good earth." 

His men drew round. 
Staring in horror at the silent shape 
That daubed his feet. Like a cold wind 
His words went through their flesh: 

"This is the M 
That bore our flag of truce. This hath Spain done. 
Look well upon it, draw the smoke of the blood 
Up into your nostrils, my companions, 
And down into your souls. This makes an end 
For Spain ! Bring forth the Spanish prisoners 
And let me look on them." 



 377 

Forth they were brought, 
A swarthy gorgeous band of soldiers, priests, 
And sailors, hedged between tv/o sturdy files 
Of British tars vsith naked cutlasses. 
Close up to  they halted, under the palm, 
Gay smiling prisoners, for they thought their friends 
Had ransomed them. Then they looked up and met 
A glance that swept athwart them like a sword, 
Making the blood strain back from their blanched faces 
Into their quivering hearts, with unknown dread, 
As that accuser pointed to the shape 
Before his feet. 

" Dogs, will ye lap his blood 
Before ye die? Make haste; for it grou-s cold! 
Ye will not, will not even dabble your hands 
In that red puddle of flesh, what? Are ye Spaniards? 
Come, come, I'll look at you, perchance there's one 
That's but a demi-devil and holds you back." 
And with the word  stepped among their ranks 
And read each face among the swarthy crew — 
The gorgeous soldiers, ringleted sailors, priests 
With rosary and cross, a slender page 
In scarlet vrith a cloud of golden hair, 
And two rope-girdled friars. 

The slim page 
 drew before the throng. ''You are young," he said, 
"Go; take this message to the camp of Spain: 
Tell them I have a hunger in my soul 
To look upon the murderers of this boy. 
To see what eyes they have, what manner of mouths. 
To touch them and to take their hands in mine, 
And draw them close to me and smUe upon them 
Until they know my soul as I know theirs, 
And they grovel in the dust and grope for mercy. 
Say that, until I get them, every day 
I'll hang two Spaniards though I dispeople 
The Spanish Main. Tell them that, every day, 
I'll bum a portion of their city down, 
Then find another city and burn that. 
And then bum others till I burn away 
Their empire from the world, ay, till I reach 



378  

The imperial throne of Philip with my fires, 
And send it shrieking down to burn in hell 
For ever. Go!" 

Then  turned once again 
To face the Spanish prisoners. With a voice 
Cold as the passionless utterance of Fate 
His grim command went forth. "Now, provost-marshal, 
Begin with yon two friars, in whose faces 
Chined like singed swine, and eyed with the spent coals 
Of filthy living, sweats the glory of Spain. 
Strip off their leprous rags 

And twist their ropes around their throats and hang them 
High over the Spanish camp for all to see. 
At dawn I'll choose two more." 



BOOK X 



Across the Atlantic 
Great rumours rushed as of a mighty wind. 
The wind of the spirit of Drake. But who shall tell 
In this cold age the power that he became 
Who drew the universe within his soul 
And moved with cosmic forces? Though the deep 
Divided it from Drake, the gorgeous court 
Of Philip shuddered away from the streaming coasts 
As a wind-cuffed field of golden wheat. The King, 
Bidding his guests to a feast in his own ship 
On that wind-darkened sea, was made a mock, 
As one by one his ladies proffered excuse 
For fear of That beyond. Round Europe now 
Ballad and story told how in the cabin 
Of Francis  there hung a magic glass 
Wherein he saw the fleets of every foe 
And all that passed aboard them. Rome herself, 
Perplexed that this proud heretic should prevail. 
Fostered a darker dream, that  had bought, 
Like old Norse wizards, power to loose or bind 
The winds at will. 



 379 

And now a wilder tale 
Flaslicd o'er the deep — of a distant blood-red dawn 
O'er San Domingo, where the embattled troops 
Of Spain and  were met — but not in war- 
Met in the dawn, by his compelling will, 
To offer up a sacrifice. Yea, there 
Between the hosts, the hands of S{)ain herself 
Slaughtered the Spanish murderers of the boy 
Who had borne Drake's flag of truce; offered them up 
As a blood-oft'ering and an expiation 
Lest Drake, with that dread alchemy of his soul, 
Should e'en transmute the dust beneath their feet 
To one same substance with the ])lace of pain 
And whelm them suddenl}' in the eternal fires. 
Rumour on rumour rushed across the sea, 
Large mockeries, and one most bitter of all, 
Wormwood to Philip, of how  had stood 
r the governor's house at San Domingo, and seen 
A mighty scutcheon of the King of Spain 
Whereon was pamted the terrestrial globe, 
And on the globe a mighty steed in act 
To spring into the heavens, and from its mouth 
Streaming like smoke a scroll, and on the scroll 
Three words of flame and fury — Xo7i sufficit 
Orbis — of how  and his seamen stood 
Gazing upon it, and could not forbear 
From summoning the Spaniards to expound 
Its meaning, whereupon a hurricane roar 
Of mirth burst from those bearded British lips, 
And that inmiortal laughter shook the world. 



So, while the imperial warrior eyes of Sj)ain 
Watched, every hour, her vast Armada grow 
Readier to launch and shatter with one stroke 
Our island's frail defence, fear gripped her still, 
For there came sounds across the heaving sea 
Of secret springs unsealed, forces unchained, 
A mustering of deep elemental powers, 
A sound as of the burgeoning of boughs 
In universal April and dead hearts 



380  

Uprising from their tombs; a mighty cry 

Of resurrection, surging through the souls 

Of all mxanldnd. For now the last wild tale 

Swept like another dawn across the deep; 

And, in that dawn, men saw the slaves of Spain, 

The mutilated negroes of the mines. 

With gaunt backs wealed and branded, scarred and seared 

By whip and iron, in Spain's brute lust for gold, 

Saw them, at Drake's great liberating word, 

Burst from their chains, erect, uplifting hands 

Of rapture to the glad new light that then, 

Then first, began to struggle thro' the clouds 

And crown all manhood with a sacred crown 

August — a light which, though from age to age 

Clouds may obscure it, grows and still shall grow. 

Until that Kingdom come, that grand Communion, 

That Commonweal, that Empire, which still draws 

Nigher with every hour, that Federation, 

That turning of the wasteful strength of war 

To accomplish large and fruitful tasks of peace, 

That gathering up of one another's loads 

Whereby the weak are strengthened and the strong 

Made stronger in the increasing good of all. 

Then, suddenly, it seemed, as he had gone, 

A ship came stealing into Plymouth Sound 

And  was home again, but not to rest; 

For scarce had he cast anchor ere the road 

To London rang beneath the flying hoofs 

That bore his brief despatch to Burleigh, saying — 

"We have missed the Plate Fleet by but twelve hours' sail, 

The reason being best known to God. No less 

We have given a cooling to the King of Spain. 

There is a great gap opened which, methinks, 

Is little to his liking. We have sacked 

The towns of his chief Indies, burnt their ships. 

Captured great store of gold and precious stones, 

Three hundred pieces of artillery. 

The more part brass. Our loss is heavy indeed. 

Under the hand of God, eight hundred men. 

Three parts of them by sickness. Captain Moone. 

My trusty old companion, he that struck 



 381 

The first blow in the South Seas cat a Spaniard, 

Died of a grievous wound at Cartagena. 

^ly fleet and I are ready to strike again 

At once, where'er the Queen and England please. 

I pray for her commands, and those \\ith speed, 

That I may strike again." Outside the scroll 

These words were writ once more — "My Queen's commands 

I much desire, your servant, Francis Drake." 

This terse despatch the hunchback Burleigh read 
Thrice over, with the broad cliff of his brow 
Bending among his l)ooks. Thrice he assayed 
To steel himself with caution as of old; 
And thrice, as a glorious lightning running along 
And flashing between those simple words, he saw 
The great new power that lay at England's hand, 
An ocean-sovereignty, a power unknown 
Before, but dawning now; a power that swept 
All earth's old plots and counterplots away 
Like straws; the germ of an unmeasured force 
New-born, that laid the source of Spanish might 
At England's mercy! Could that force but grow 
Ere Spain should nip it, ere the mighty host 
That waited in the Xetherlands even now, 
That host of thirty thousand men encamped 
Round Antwerp, under Parma, should embark 
Convoyed by that Invincible Armada 
To leap at England's throat! Thrice he assayed 
To think of England's helplessness, her ships 
Little and few. Thrice he assaj-ed to quench 
With caution the high furnace of his soul 
Which  had kindled. As he read tlie last 
Rough simple plea, I wait my Queen^s commands, 
His deep eyes flashed with glorious tears. 

lie leapt 
To his feet and cried aloud, "Before my God, 
I am proud, I am very proud for England's sake! 
This  is a teriiblc man to the King of Spain." 

And still, still, Gloriana, brooding darkl}' 

On Miiry of Scotland's doonij who now at last 





D?^ 


'-. .-s. E 




T: 


: : L^ : _ " _. ^ : 


: : - : n 


li>r 3 snahe 






'■ - - ' 




1 ' - - - 


^ 




L- - ^-— -. 








, " ' 








—7:. i'T,\_ 




- — 


^""- 




- 


- :-- - 


z ' 








"7 ■ 




. _- -- ■ 




1- 






T 


^-- 


-- 




'-T - 


' ^' 






' . - 




- - -■ 


£" 






-k 


^" 








--^ 






- 


/ 








t 








T: 








•V - 














J.; 








£ 




.-- 




t 








I: 









-±d-aEt 



 I: 

Doom, that awaits is if ve are forced :a war. 

Te^ iind wiko kziows? — ^^'^"'gfc ^m"^ naj iocse a sword. 

Its point ^ ZI04 inevicafalj bared 

A^aiiLsC the breast at Fngtand!" Jks she spakev 

The winds withoat damoored with daA of bdb^ 

There was a ^eazn of Uvdies and a roar — 

Mary, tke inrxireaa of the .Vorfft, u 4mi^ 

Gad »xn tke QufUiC 

Her head bc&t dofwm: Ae wvpC 
'Phv me. friend, tkoaeik I be qoecB, O jet 
Mv heart is wnnaB, and I am sore ^jujuuI 
C^ every dde, — SeotiaBd and Fiance and Spaoa 
BeseT: me. and I katrw act where to tura-'* 
Even as she spake, Aere came a harried step 
Into t^t <fim nek diamber. Wa^mgham 
Stood thcfe, bdoie her. without ceraBon j 
TbnEtmg a letter forth: "At: last^'^heczied, 
^ Yo«ir Majestj auij read the foil mtent 
Of priBB% ^laia. Here, plainhr wrhten ont 
XJpcm this paper, worth joor kmgdom^s crown, 
ThB letter, stolen bjr a trogtx ^j. 
Out of the inmoBt chamber of the Fbpe 
SxtoB hsBDself, here is jour murder planned: 
Kame not jonr Ministers who with 5ii'-'h hasce 
Plucked out ^his xipe-. Miry, rn.n 7-^: - breast! 
Bead h u ic ho w, with hg :±±r: 1 men. 

The pick of Europe, F^rma xi^ 
Whie belaad, grasped in their Am^ 
And the I^ of Wi^t, against c^ - 
Becooae their bKe.*" 

And atwajs Bome.*^ she m 

InEnriandLitl sir '-l:i~ - - 

Her curse c 

Cursed — 

Her shj- ^ads. 

Theshj>.:- . -^ 

Darkens the sea^ 

Is on my eh: 

Shehaihih: -i 

Englishmen. --:: 



384  

"Tore God," 
Cried Walsingham, *'my Queen, 3-0U do them \\Tong! 
There is another Rome — not this of Spain 
Which lurks to pluck the world back into darkness 
And stab it there for gold. There is a City 
T\Tiose eyes are tow'rd the morning; on whose heights 
Blazes the Cross of Chxrist above the world; 
A Rome that shall wage warfare yet for God 
In the dark days to come, a Rome whose thought 
Shall march with our humanity and be proud 
To cast old creeds like seed into the ground, 
Watch the strange shoots and foster the new flower 
Of faiths we know not j'et. Is this a di'eam? 
I speak as one by knighthood bound to speak; 
For even this day — and my heart burns with it — 
I heard the Catholic gentlemen of England 
Speaking in grave assembly. At one breath 
Of peril to our island, why, their swords 
Leapt from their scabbards, and their crj^ went up 
To split the heavens — God save our English Queen! " 
Even as he spake there passed the rushing gleam 
Of torches once again, and as they stood 
Silently listening, all the winds ran wild 
With clamouring bells, and a great cry went up — 
God save Elizabeth, our English Queen! 

"I'll vouch for some two hundred Catholic throats 

Among that thousand," whispered Walsingham 

Eagerly, with his eyes on the Queen's face. 

Then, seeing it brighten, fer^-ently he cried. 

Pressing the swift advantage home, "O, Madam, 

The heart of England now is all on fire! 

We are one people, as we have not been 

In all our history, all prepared to die 

Around your throne. !Madam, you are beloved 

As never yet was English king or queen!"' 

She looked at him, the tears in her keen eyes 

Glittered — "And I am very proud," she said, 

"But if our enemies command the world, 

And we have one small island and no more ..." 

She ceased; and Drake, in a strange voice, hoarse and low. 



 385 

Trcmbliiig with passion deeper than all speech, 
Crietl out — "No more than the great ocean-sea 
Which makes the enemies' coast our frontier now; 
No more than that great Empire of the deep 
Whicli rolls from Pole to Pole, washing the world 
With thunder, that great Empire whose command 
This da}' is yours to take. Hear me, my Queen, 
This is a dream, a new dream, but a true; 
For mightier days are dawning on the world 
Than heart of man hath known. If England hold 
The sea, she holds the hundred thousand gates 
That open to futurity. She holds 
The higliway of all ages. Argosies 
Of unknown glory set their sails this day 
For England out of ports beyond the stars. 
Ay, on the sacred seas we ne'er shall know 
They hoist their sails this day by peaceful quays, 
Great gleaming whan-es in the perfect Cityof God, 
If she but clahn her heritage." 

He ceased; 
And the deep dream of that new realm the sea, 
Through all the soul of Gloriana surged, 
A moment, then with splendid eyes that filled 
With fire of sunsets far awaj', she cried 
(Faith making her a child, yet quecnlier still) 
"Yea, claim it tliou for me!" 

A moment there 
Trembling she stood. Then, once again, there passed 
A ru.sh of torches through the gloom without, 
And a great cry ''God save Elizabeth, 
God save our English Queen!" 

"Yea go, then, go, " 
She said, "God speed you now, Sir Francis Drake, 
Not as a privateer, but with full powers. 
My Admiral-at-the-Seas!" 

Without a word 
 bent above her hand and, ere she knew it, 
His eyes from the dark doorwaj- flashed farewell 
And he was gone. But ere he leapt to saddle 
Walsingham stood at his stirrup, muttering "Ride, 
Ride now like hell to Plymouth; for the Queen 

25 



386  

Is hard beset, and ere ye are out at sea 
Her mood will change. The friends of Spain will move 
Earth and the heavens for your recall. They'll tempt her 
With their false baits of peace, though I shall starid 
Here at your back through thick and thin; farewell!" 
Fire flashed beneath the hoofs and  was gone. 

Scarce had he vanished in the night than doubt 

Once more assailed the Queen. The death of Mary 

Had brought e'en France against her. Walsingham, 

And Burleigh himself, prime mover of that death, 

Being held in much disfavour for it, stood 

As helpless. Long ere  or human power, 

They thought, could put to sea, a courier sped 

To Plymouth bidding  forbear to strike 

At Spain, but keep to the high seas, and lo. 

The roadstead glittered empty.  was gone! 

Gone! Though the friends of Spain had poured their gold 

To thin his ranks, and every hour his crews 

Deserted, he had laughed — "Let Spain buy scum! 

Next to an honest seaman I love best 

An honest landsman. What more goodly task 

Than teaching brave men seamanship?" He had filled 

His ships with soldiers! Out in the teeth of the gale 

That raged against him he had driven. In vain, 

Amid the boisterous laughter of the quays, 

A pinnace dashed in hot pursuit and met 

A roaring breaker and came hurthng back 

With oars and spars all trailing in the foam, 

A tangled mass of wreckage and despair. 

Sky swept to stormy sky: no sail could live 

In that great yeast of waves; but  was gone! 

Then, once again, across the rolling sea 

Great rumours rushed of how he had sacked the port 

Of Cadiz and had swept along the coast 

To Lisbon, where the whole Armada lay. 

Had snapped up prizes under its very nose, 

And taunted Santa Cruz, High Admiral 

Of Spain, striving to draw him out for fight. 

And offering, if his course should lie that way, 



 387 

To convoy liim to Britain, taunted him 

So bitterly that for once, in the worhl's eyes, 

A jest had power to kill; for Santa Cruz 

Died with the spleen of it, since he could not move 

Before the appointed season. Then there came 

Flying back home, the Queen's old Admiral 

Borough, deserting  and all aghast 

At Drake's temerity: "For," he said, "this man. 

Thrust o'er my head, against all precedenl. 

Bade me follow him into harbour mouths 

A-flame with cannon like the jaws of death, 

Whereat I much demurred; and straightway  

Clapped me in irons, me — an officer 

And Admiral of the Queen; and, though my voice 

Was all against it, plunged into the pit 

Without me, left me with some word that burns 

And ranldes in me still, making me fear 

The man was mad, some word of lonely seas, 

A desert island and a mutineer 

And dead jNIagellan's gallows. Sirs, my life 

Was hardly safe with him. Why, he resolved 

To storm the Castle of St. Vincent, sirs, 

A castle on a cliff, grinning with guns, 

Well known impregnable! The Spaniards fear 

Drake; but to see him land below it and bid 

Surrender, sirs, the strongest fort of Spain 

Without a blow, they laughed! And straightvray he, 

With all the fury of Satan, turned that cliff 

To hell itself. He sent down to the ships 

For faggots, broken oars, beams, bowsprits, masts. 

And piled them up against the outer gates. 

Higher and higher, and fired them. There he stood 

Amid the smoke and flame and cannon-shot. 

This Admiral, like a common seamen, black 

With soot, besmeared with blood, his naked arms 

Full of great faggots, labouring like a giant 

And roaring like Apollyon. Sirs, he is mad! 

But did he take it, say you? Yea, he took it, 

The mightiest stronghold on the coast of Spain, 

Took it and tumbled all its big brass guns 

Clattering over the cliffs into the sea. 



388  

But, sirs, ye need not raise a cheer so loud! 
It is not warfare. 'Twas a madman's trick, 
A devil's!" 

Then the rumour of a storm 
That scattered the fleet of  to the four winds 
Disturbed the heart of England, as his ships 
Came straggling into harbour, one by one, 
Saying they could not find him. Then, at last, 
When the storm burst in its earth-shaking might 
Along our coasts, one night of rolling gloom 
His cannon woke old Plymouth. In he came 
Across the thunder and lightning of the sea 
With his grim ship of war and, close behind, 
A shadow like a mountain or a cloud 
Torn from the heaven-high panoplies of Spain, 
A captured galleon loomed, and round her prow 
A blazoned scroll, whence (as she neared the quays 
Which many a lanthorn swung from brawny fist 
Yellowed) the sudden crimson of her name 
San Filippe flashed o'er the white sea of faces. 
And a rending shout went skyward that outroared 
The blanching breakers — '' 'Tis the heart of Spain! 
The great San Filippe!^' Overhead she towered, 
The mightiest ship afloat; and in her hold 
The riches of a continent, a prize 
Greater than earth had ever known; for there 
Not only ruby and pearl like ocean-beaches 
Heaped on some wizard coast in that dim hull 
Blazed to the lanthorn-light; not only gold 
Gleamed, though of gold a million would not buy 
Her store; but in her cabin lay the charts 
And secrets of the wild unwhispered wealth 
Of India, secrets that splashed London wharves 
With coloured dreams and made her misty streets 
Flame like an Eastern City when the sun 
Shatters itself on jev/elled domes and spills 
Its crimson wreclcage thro' the silvery palms. 
And of those dreams the far East India quest 
Began : the first foundation-stone was laid 
Of our great Indian Empire, and a star 
Began to tremble on the brows of England 
That time can never darken. 



 389 

But now the seas 
Darkened indeed with menace; now at hist 
The cohl wind of the black approaching wings 
Of Azrael crept across tiie deep: the storm 
Throbbed witii their thunderous pulse, and ere that moon 
Waned, a swift gunboat foamed into the Sound 
With word that all the Invincible Armada 
Was hoisting sail for England. 

Even now, 
Elizabeth, torn a thousand waj's, withheld 
The word for which  pleatled as for life, 
That he might meet them ere they left their coasts, 
Meet them or ever they reached the Channel, meet them 
Now, or — "Too late! Too late!" At last his voice 
Beat do\Mi e'en those that blindly dinned her ears 
Vv'ith chatter of meeting S])ain on British soil; 
And swiftly she commanded (seeing once more 
The light that burned amid the approaching gloom 
In Drake's deep eyes) Lord Howard of Efiingham, 
High Admiral of England, straight to join him 
At Plymouth Sound. "Plow many ships are wanted?" 
She asked him, thinking "we are few, indeed!" 
"Give me but sixteen merchantmen," he said, 
"And but four battleships, by the mercy of God, 
ril answer for the Armada!" Out to sea 
They swept, in the teeth of a gale; but vainly  
Strove to impart the thought wherewith his mind 
Travailed — to win command of the ocean-sea 
By bursting on the fleets of Spain at once 
Even as they left their ports, not as of old 
To hover in a vain dream of defence 
Round fifty threatened points of British coast, 
But Howard, clinging to his old-world order. 
Flung out his ships in a loose, long, straggling line 
Across the Channel, waiting, wary, alert. 
But powerless thus as a string of scattered sea-gulls 
Beating against the storm. Then, flying to meet them, 
A merchantman brought terror down the wind, 
With news that she had seen that monstrous host 
Stretching from sky to sky, great hulks of doom, 
Dragging death's midnight with them o'er the sea 



390  

Tow'rds England. Up to Howard's flag-ship  
In his immortal battle-ship — Revenge, 
Rushed thro' the foam, and thro' the swirling seas 
His pinnace dashed alongside. On to the decks 
0' the tossing flag-ship, like a very Viking 
Shaking the surf and rainbows of the spray 
From sun-smit lion-like mane and beard he stood 
Before Lord Howard in the escutcheoned poop 
And poured his heart out like the rending sea 
In passionate wave on wave : 

" If yonder fleet 
Once reach the Channel, hardly the mercy of God 
Saves England! I would pray with my last breath, 
Let us beat up to windward of them now. 
And handle them before they reach the Channel." 
''Nay; but we cannot bare the coast," cried Howard, 
"Nor have we stores of powder or food enough!" 
"My lord," said Drake, with his great arm outstretched, 
"There is food enough in yonder enemy's ships. 
And powder enough and cannon-shot enough! 
We must re- victual there. Look! look!" he cried, 
And pointed to the heavens. As for a soul 
That by sheer force of will compels the world 
To work his bidding, so it seemed the wind 
That blew against them slowly veered. The sails 
Quivered, the skies revolved. A northerly breeze 
Awoke and now, behind the British ships. 
Blew steadily tow'rds the unseen host of Spain. 
"It is the breath of God," cried Drake; "they lie 
Wind-bound, and we may work our will with them. 
Signal the word. Lord Howard, and drive down!" 
And as a man convinced by heaven itself 
Lord Howard ordered, straightway, the whole fleet 
To advance. 

And now, indeed, as  foresaw, 
The Armada lay, beyond the dim horizon. 
Wind-bound and helpless in Corunna bay. 
At England's mercy, could her fleet but draw 
Nigh enough, with its fire-ships and great guns 
To windward. Nearer, nearer, league by league 
The ships of England came; till Ushant lay 



 391 

Some seventy leagues beliind. Then, yet once more 
The wind veered, straight against them. To remain 
Beating against it idly was to starve: 
And, as a man wliose jiowcr upon the world 
Fails for one moment of exhausted will, 
Drake, gathering up his forces as he went 
For one more supreme effort, turned his ship 
Tow'rds Plymouth, and retreated with the rest. 

There, while the ships refitted with all haste 

And axe and hammer rang, one golden eve 

Just as the setting sun began to fringe 

The clouds with crimson, and the creaming waves 

Were one wild riot of fair}' rainbows,  

Stood \\-ith old comrades on the close-cropped green 

Of Plymouth Hoe, playing a game of bowls. 

Far off unseen, a little barque, full-sail, 

Struggled and leapt and strove tow'rds Plymouth Sound, 

Noteless as any speckled herring-gull 

Flickering between the white flakes of the waves. 

A group of schoolboj's wdth their satchels lay 

Stretched on the green, gazing with great \^dde eyes 

Upon their seamen heroes, as like gods 

Disporting with the battles of the world 

They loomed, tossing black bowls like cannon-balls 

Against the rosy West, or lounged at ease 

W^ith faces olive-dark against that sky 

Laughing, while from the neighboring inn mine host, 

White aproned and blue-jerkined, hurried out 

With foaming cups of sack, and they drank deep, 

Tossing their heads back under the golden clouds 

And burying their bearded lips. The hues 

That slashed their doublets, for the boy's bright eyes 

(Even as the gleams of Grecian cloud or moon 

Revealed the old gods) were here rich dusky streaks 

Of splendour from the Spanish Main, that shone 

But to proclaim these heroes. There a boy 

More bold crept nearer to a slouched hat thrown 

Upon the green, and touched the silver plume, 

And felt as if he had touched a sunset-isle 

Of feathery palms beyond a crimson sea. 



392  

Another stared at the blue rings of smoke 

A storm-scarred seaman puffed from a long pipe 

Primed with the strange new herb they had lately found 

In far Virginia. But the little ship 

Now plunging into Plymouth Bay none saw. 

E'en when she had anchored and her straining boat 

Had touched the land, and the boat's crew over the quays 

Leapt with a shout, scarce was there one to heed. 

A seaman, smiling, swaggered out of the inn 

Swinging in one brown hand a gleaming cage 

Wherein a big green parrot chattered and clung 

Fluttering against the wires. A troop of girls 

With arms linked paused to watch the game of bowls; 

And now they flocked around the cage, while one 

With rosy finger tempted the horny beak 

To bite. Close overhead a sea-mew flashed 

Seaward. Once, from an open window, soft 

Through trellised leaves, not far away, a voice 

Floated, a voice that flushed the cheek of Drake, 

The voice of Bess, bending her glossy head 

Over the broidery frame, in a quiet song. 

The song ceased. Still, with rainbows in their eyes, 
The schoolboys watched the bowls like cannon-balls 
Roll from the hand of gods along the turf. 

Suddenly, tow'rds the green, a little cloud 

Of seamen, shouting, stumbling, as they ran 

Drew all eyes on them. The game ceased. A voice 

Rough with the storms of many an ocean roared 

''Drake! Cap'en Drake! The Armada! 

They are in the Channel! We sighted them — 

A line of battleships! We could not see 

An end of them. They stretch from north to south 

Like a great storm of clouds, glinting with guns, 

From sky to sky!" 

So, after all his strife. 
The wasted weeks had tripped him, the fierce hours 
Of pleading for the sea's command, great hours 
And golden moments, all were lost. The fleet 
Of Spain had won the Channel without a blow. 



 303 

All eyes were turned on Dralce, as he stood there 
A giant against the sunset and the sea 
Looming, alone. Far off, the first white star 
Gleamed in a rosy space of heaven. He tossed 
A grim black ball i' the lustrous air and laughed, — 
"Come, lads," he said, "we've time to finish the game " 



BOOK XI 

Few minutes, and well wasted those, were spent 
On that great game of bowls; for well knew  
What panic threatened Plymouth, since his fleet 
Lay trapped there by the black head-wind that blew 
Straight up the Sound, and Plymouth town itself, 
Except the ships won seaward ere the dawn, 
Lay at the Armada's mercy. Never a seaman 
Of all the sea-dogs clustered on the quays, 
And all the captains clamouring round Lord Howard, 
Hoped that one ship might win to the open sea: 
At dawn, they thought, the Armada's rolling guns 
To windward, in an hour, must shatter them, 
Huddled in their red slaughter-house like sheep. 

Now was the great sun sunken and the night 

Dark. Far to Westward, like the soul of man 

Fighting blind nature, a ^\^ld flare of red 

Upon some windy headland suddenly leapt 

And vanished flickering into the clouds. Again 

It leapt and vanished: then all at once it streamed 

Steadily as a crimson torch upheld 

By Titan hands to heaven. It was the first 

Beacon! A sudden silence swept along 

The seething quays, and in their midst appeared 

Drake. 

Then the jubilant thunder of his voice 
Rolled, bufTcting the sca-A\'ind far and nigh. 
And ere they knew what power as of a sea . 
Surged through them, his immortal battle-ship 
Revenge had flung out cables to the quays. 



394  

And while the seamen, as he had commanded, 

Knotted thick ropes together, he stood apart 

(For well he knew what panic threatened still) 

Whittling idly at a scrap of wood, 

And carved a little boat out for the child 

Of some old sea-companion. 

So great and calm a master of the world 

Seemed  that, as he whittled, and the chips 

Fluttered into the blackness over the quay. 

Men said that in this hour of England's need 

Each tiny flake turned to a battle-ship; 

For now began the lanthorns, one by one. 

To glitter, and half -reveal the shadowy hulks 

Before him. — So the huge old legend grew, 

Not all unworthy the Homeric age 

Of gods and god-like men. 

St. Michael's Mount, 
Answering the first wild beacon far away. 
Rolled crimson thunders to the stormy sky! 
The ropes were knotted. Through the panting dark 
Great heaving lines of seamen all together 
Hauled with a shout, and all together again 
Hauled with a shout against the roaring wind; 
And slowly, slowly, onward tow'rds the sea 
Moved the Revenge, and seaward ever heaved 
The brawny backs together, and in their midst. 
Suddenly, as they slackened,  was there 
Hauling like any ten, and with his heart 
Doubling the strength of all, giving them joy 
Of battle against those odds, — ay, till they found 
Delight in the burning tingle of the blood 
That even their hardy hands must feel besmear 
The harsh, rough, straining ropes. There as they toiled, 
Answering a score of hills, old Beachy Head 
Streamed like a furnace to the rolling clouds 
Then all around the coast each windy ness 
And craggy mountain kindled. Peak from peak 
Caught the tremendous fire, and passed it on 
Round the bluff East and the black mouth of Thames, — 
Up, northward to the waste wild Yorkshire fells 
And gloomy Cumberland, where, like a giant. 



 39o 

Great Skiddaw grasped Uie red lenipestuous brand, 

And thrust it up against the reeling heavens. 

Then all night long, inland, the wandering winds 

Ran wild with elaniour and clash of startled bells; 

All night the cities seethed with torches, flashed 

With twent}' thousand flames of burnished steel; 

While over the tramj)le and thunder of hooves blazed forth 

The lightning of wild trumpets. Lonely lanes 

Of country darkness, lit by cottage doors 

Entwined ^vith rose and honeysuclde, roared 

Like mountain-torrents now — Last, AVest, and South, 

As to the coasts \nth pike and musket streamed 

The trained bands, horse and foot, from every town 

And every hamlet. All the shaggy hills 

From Milford Haven to the Downs of Kent, 

And up to Ilumber, gleamed with many a hedge 

Of pikes between the beacon's crimson glares; 

While in red London fortj^ thousand men, 

Li case the Invader should prevail, drew swords 

Around their Queen. All night in dark St. Paid's, 

While round it rolled a multitudinous roar 

As of the Atlantic on a A\'estern beach. 

And all the leaning London streets were lit 

With fury of torches, rose the passionate prayer 

Of England's peril: 

Lord God of Hosts, 
Let Thine enemies know that Thou hast taken 
England into Thine hands! 

The mighty sound 
Rolled, billowing round the kneeling aisles, then died. 
Echoing up the heights. A voice, far off, 
As on the cross of Calvary, caught it up 
And poured the prayer o'er that deep hush, alone: 
We beseech Thee, God, to go before our armies, 
Bless and prosper them both by land and sea! 
Grant unto them Thy victory, God, 

As Thou uscdd to do to Thy children when they please Thee! 
All power, all strength, all victory come from Thee! 
Then from the lips of all those thousands burst 
A sound as from the rent heart of an ocean, 
One tumult, one great rushing storm of wings 



396  

Cleaving the darkness round the Gates of Heaven: 
Some pnt their trust in chariots and some in horses; 
Bid we will remember Thy name, Lord our God! 

So, while at Plymouth Sound her seamen toiled 

All through the night, and scarce a ship had won 

Seaward, the heart of England cried to God. 

All night, while trumpets yelled and blared without, 

And signal cannon shook the blazoned panes, 

And billowing multitudes went thundering by, 

Amid that solemn pillared hush arose 

From lips of kneeling thousands one great prayer 

Storming the Gates of Heaven ! Lord, our God, 

Heavenly Father, have mercy upon our Queen, 

To whom Thy far dispersed flock do fly 

In the anguish of their souls. Behold, behold, 

How many princes band themselves against her, 

How long Thy servant hath laboured to them for peace, 

How proudly they prepare themselves for battle! 

Arise, therefore! Maintain Thine own cause, 

Judge Thou between her and her eiiemies! 

She seeketh not her own honour, but Thine, 

Not the dominions of others, but Thy truth, 

Not bloodshed but the saving of the afflicted! 

rend the heavens, therefore, and come down, 

Deliver Thy people! 

To vanquish is all one with Thee, by few 

Or many, want or wealth, weakness or strength. 

The cause is Thine, the enemies Thine, the afflicted 

Thine! The honour, victory, and trimnph 

Thine! Grant her people now one heart, 07ie mind, 

One strength. Give unto her councils and her captains 

Wisdom and courage strongly to withstand 

The forces of her enemies, that the fame 

And glory of Thy Kingdom may be spread 

Unto the ends of the world. Father, we crave 

This in Thy mercy, for the precious death 

Of Thy dear Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ! 

Amen. 

And as the dreadful dawn thro' mist-wreaths broke, 

And out of Plymouth Sound at last, with checri: 



 397 

Ringing from many a thousand tliroats, tlicrc struggled 
Six little ships, all that the night's long toil 
Had warped down to the sea (but leading them 
The ship of Drake) there rose one ocean-cry 
From all those worshippers — Let God arise, 
And let His enemies be scattered! 



Under the leaden fogs of that new dawn, 

Empty and cold, indifferent as death, 

The sea heaved strangely to the seamen's e3'cs. 

Seeing all round them only the leaden surge 

Wrapped in wet mists or flashing here and there 

With crumbling white. Against the cold wet wind 

Westward the little ships of England beat 

With short tacks, close inshore, striving to win 

The windward station of the threatening battle 

That neared behind the veil. Six little ships. 

No more, beat Westward, even as all manldnd 

Beats up against that universal wind 

Whereon like withered leaves all else is blown 

Down one wide way to death : the soul alone. 

Whether at last it wins, or faints and fails, 

Stems the dark tide with its intrepid sails. 

Close-hauled, ^^^th many a short tack, struggled and strained, 

North-west, South-west, the ships; but ever Westward gained 

Some little way with every tack; and soon. 

While the prows plunged beneath the gre^^-gold noon, 

Lapped by the crackling waves, even as the wind 

Died down a little, in the mists behind 

Stole out from Plymouth Sound the struggling score 

Of ships that might not win last night to sea. 

They followed; but the Six went on before. 

Not knowing, alone, for God and Liberty. 



Now, as they tacked North-west, the sullen roar 
Of reefs crept out, or some strange tinkling sound 

Of sheep upon the hills. South-west once more 
The bo'sun's whistle swung their bowsprits round; 



398  

South-west until the long low lapping splash 
Was all they heard, of keels that still ran out 

Seaward, then with one muffled heave and crash 
Once more the whistles brought their sails about. 

And now the noon began to wane; the west 

With slow rich colours filled and shadowy forms, 

Dark curdling wreaths and fogs with crimsoned breast, 
And tangled zones of dusk like frozen storms, 

Motionless, flagged with sunset, hulled with doom! 

Motionless? Nay, across the darkening deep 
Surely the whole sky moved its gorgeous gloom 

Onward; and like the curtains of a sleep 

The red fogs crumbled, mists dissolved away! 

There, like death's secret dawning thro' a dream, 
Great thrones of thunder dusked the dying day. 

And, higher, pale towers of cloud began to gleam. 

There, in one heaven-wide storm, great masts and clouds 

Of sail crept slowly forth, the ships of Spain! 
From North to South, their tangled spars and shrouds 

Controlled the slow wind as with bit and rein; 
Onward they rode in insolent disdain 

Sighting the little fleet of England there, 
While o'er the sullen splendour of the main 

Three solemn guns tolled all their host to prayer, 
And their great ensign blazoned all the doom-fraught air. 

The sacred standard of their proud crusade 

Up to the mast-head of their flag-ship soared: 
On one side knelt the Holy Mother-maid, 

On one the crucified Redeemer poured 
His blood, and all their kneeling hosts adored 

Their saints, and clouds of incense heavenward stream^ed, 
While pomp of cannonry and pike and sword 

Down long sea-lanes of mocking menace gleamed, 
And chant of priests rolled out o'er seas that darldy dreamed. 



 399 

Who comes to fight for England? Is it ye, 

Six little straws that dance upon the foam? 
Ay, sweeping o'er the sunset-crimsoned sea 

Let the j)roud pageant in its glory come, 
Leaving the sunset like a hecatomb 

Of souls whose bodies yet endure the chain! 
Let slaves, by thousands, ])randed, scarred and dumb, 

In those dark galleys grip their oars again, 
And o'er the rolling deep bring on the pomp of Spain; — 



Bring on tlie pomp of royal paladins 

(For all the princedoms of the land are there!) 
And for the gorgeous purple of their sins 

The papal pomp bring on with psalm and prayer: 
Nearer the splendour heaves; can ye not hear 

The rushing foam, not see the blazoned arms. 
And black-faced hosts thro' leagues of golden air 

Crowding the decks, muttering their beads and charms 
To where, in furthest heaven, they thicken like locust-swarms? 

Bring on the pomp and pride of old Castille, 

Blazon the skies with royal Aragon, 
Beneath Oquendo let old ocean reel. 

The purple pomp of priestly Rome bring on; 
And let her censers dusk the dying sun. 

The thunder of her banners on the breeze 
Follo\\ing Sidonia's glorious galleon 

Deride the sleeping thunder of the seas. 
While twenty thousand warriors chant her litanies. 

Lo, all their decks are kneeling! Sky to sky 

Responds! It is their solemn evening hour. 
Salve Regina, though the daylight die. 

Salve Regina, though the darkness lour; 
Have they not still the kingdom and the power? 

Salve Regina, hark, their thousands cry, 
From where like clouds to where like mountains tower 

Their crowded galleons looming far or nigh, 
Salve Regina, hark, what distant seas rei)ly! 



400  

What distant seas, what distant ages hear? 

Bring on the pomp! the sun of Spain goes down: 
The moon but swells the tide of praise and prayer; 

Bring on the world-wide pomp of her renown; 
Let darkness crown her with a starrier crown, 

And let her watch the fierce waves crouch and fawn 
Round those huge hulks from which her cannon frown. 

While close inshore the wet sea-mists are drawn 
Round England's Drake: then wait, in triumph, for the dawn. 



The sun of Rome goes down; the night is dark! 

Still are her thousands praying, still their cry 
Ascends from the wide waste of waters, hark! 

Ave Maria, darker grows the sky! 
Ave Maria, those about to die 

Salute thee! Nay, what wandering winds blaspheme 
With random gusts of chilling prophecy 

Against the solemn sounds that heavenward stream! 
The night is come at last. Break not the splendid dream. 



But through the misty darkness, close inshore, 
North-west, South-west, and ever Westward strained 
The little ships of England. All night long, 
As down the coast the reddening beacons leapt, 
The crackle and lapping splash of tacking keels, 
The bo'suns' low sharp whistles and the whine 
Of ropes, mixing with many a sea-bird's cry 
Disturbed the darkness, waking vague swift fears 
Among the mighty hulks of Spain that lay 
Nearest, then fading through the mists inshore 
North-west, then growing again, but farther down 
Their ranks to Westward with each dark return 
And dark departure, till the rearmost rank 
Of grim sea-castles heard the swish and creak 
Pass plashing seavv'^ard thro' the wet sea-mists 
To windward now of all that monstrous host. 
Then heard no more than wandering sea-birds' cries 
Wheeling around their leagues of lanthorn-light. 
Or heave of waters, waiting for the dawn. 



 401 

Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn 

Rolled o'er the waters. The f^rej' mists were fled. 
See, in their reeking heaven-wide crescent drawn 

Those masts and spars and cloudy sails, outspread 
Like one great sulphurous tempest soaked with red, 

In vain withstand the march of brightening skies: 
The dawn sweeps onward and the night is dead, 

And lo, to windward, what bright menace lies, 
What glory kindles now in England's wakening eyes? 



There, on the glittering plains of open sea. 

To windv/ard now, behind the fleets of Spain, 
Two little files of ships arc tossing free. 

Free of the winds and of the wind-swept main: 
Were they not trapped? Who brought them forth iigain. 

Free of the great new fields of England's war. 
With sails like blossoms shining after rain. 

And guns that sparkle to the morning star? 
Drake! — first upon the deep that rolls to Trafalgar! 

And Spain knows well that flag of fiery fame, 

Spain knows who leads those files across the sea; 
Implacable, invincible, his name 

El Draque, creeps hissing through her ranks to lee; 
But now she holds the rolling heavens in fee, 

His ships are few. They surge across the foam, 
The hunt is up! But need the mountains flee 

Or fear the snarling wolf -pack? Let them come! 
They crouch, but dare not leap upon the flanks of Rome. 

Nearer thej' come and nearer! Nay, prepare! 

Close your huge ranks that sweep from sky to sky! 
Madness itself would shrink; but  will dare 

Eternal hell! Let the great signal fly — 
Close up 5^our ranks; El Draque comes down to die! 

El Draque is brave ! The vast sea-cities loom 
Thro' heaven: Spain spares one smile of chivalry, 

One wintry smile across her cannons' gloom 
As that frail fleet full-sail comes rushing tow'rds its doom. 

26 



402  

Suddenly, as the wild change of a dream, 

Even as the Spaniards watched those lean sharp prows 

Leap straight at their huge hulks, watched well content, 

Knowing their foes, once grappled, must be doomed; 

Even as they caught the rush and hiss of foam 

Across that narrow, dwindling gleam of sea. 

And heard, abruptly close, the sharp commands 

And steady British answers, caught one glimpse 

Of bare-armed seamen waiting by their guns, 

The vision changed! The ships of England swerved 

Swiftly — a volley of flame and thunder swept 

Blinding the buffeted air, a volley of iron 

From four sheer broadsides, crashing thro' a hulk 

Of Spain. She reeled, blind in the fiery surge 

And fury of that assault. So swift it seemed 

That as she heeled to leeward, ere her guns 

Trained on the foe once more, the sulphurous cloud 

That wrapped the sea, once, twice, and thrice again 

Split with red thunder-claps that rent and raked 

Her huge beams through and through. Ay, as she heeled 

To leeward still, her own grim cannon belched 

Their lava skyward, wounding the void air, 

And, as by miracle, the ships of  

Were gone. Along the Spanish rear they swept 

From North to South, raking them as they went 

At close range, hardly a pistol-shot away, 

With volley on volley. Never Spain had seen 

Seamen or marksmen like to these who sailed 

Two knots against her one. They came and went, 

Suddenly neared or sheered away at will 

As if by magic, pouring flame and iron 

In four full broadsides thro' some Spanish hulk 

Ere one of hers burst blindly at the sky. 

Southward, along the Spanish rear they swept. 

Then swung about, and volleying sheets of flame, 

Iron, and death, along the same fierce road 

Littered with spars, reeking with sulphurous fumes, 

Returned, triumphantly rushing, all their sails 

Alow, aloft, full-bellied with the wind. 



 403 

Then, then, from sky to sky, one nuKhty surge 

Of baleful pride, liiio;e wratli, storiny disduiii, 
With sluidderinp; clouds and towers of sail would urpje 

Onward the heavinj; citadels of Spain, 
Which dras^efl earth's thunders o'er the groaning main, 

And held the panoplies of faith in fee, 
Beating against the wind, struggling in vain 

To close with tliat swift ocean-cavalry: 
Spain had all earth in charge! Had England, then, the sea? 



Spain had the mountains — mountains flow like clouds. 

Spain had great kingdoms — kingdoms melt away! 
Yet, in that crescent, army on army crowds, 

How shall she fear what seas or winds can say? — 
The seas that leap and shine round earth's decay. 

The ^^^nds that mount and sing while empires fall. 
And mountains pass like waves in the wind's way. 

And dying gods thro' shuddering twilights call. 
Had England, then, the sea that sweeps o'er one and all? 

See, in gigantic wrath the Rata hurls 

Her mighty prows round to the wild sea- wind: 
The deep like one black maelstrom round her swirls 

While great Recald6 follows hard behind: 
Reeling, like Titans, thunder-blasted, blind. 

They strive to cross the ships of England — yea, 
Challenge them to the grapple, and only find 

Red broadsides bursting o'er the bursting spray, 
And England surging still along her windward way! 

To windward still Revenge and Raleigh flash 

And thunder, and the sea flames red between: 
In vain against the wind the galleons crash 

And plunge and pour blind volleys thro' the screen 
Of rolling sulphurous clouds at dimly seen 

Topsails that, to and fro, like sea-birds fly! 
Ever to leeward the great hulks careen; 

Their thousand cannon can but wound the sky. 
While England's little Rainbow foams and flashes by. 



404  

Suddenly the flag-ship of Recald6, stung 

To fury it seemed, heeled like an avalanche 

To leeward, then reeled out beyond the rest 

Against the wind, alone, daring the foe 

To grapple her. At once the little Revenge 

With Drake's flag flying flashed at her throat, 

And hardly a cable's-length away out-belched 

Broadside on broadside, under those great cannon, 

Crashing through five-foot beams, four shots to one, 

While Howard and the rest swept to and fro 

Keeping at deadly bay the rolling hulks 

That looming like Leviathans now plunged 

Desperately against the freshening wind 

To rescue the great flag-ship where she lay 

Alone, amid the cannonades of Drake, 

Alone, like a volcanic island lashed 

With crimson hurricanes, dinning the winds 

With isolated thunders, flaking the skies 

With wrathful lava, while great spars and blocks 

Leapt through the cloudy glare and feU, far off, 



And so they came 
At dead of night on Callao de Lima! 
They saw the harbour lights across the waves 
Glittering, and the shadowy hulks of ships 
Gathered together like a flock of sheep 
Within the port. With shouts and clink of chains 
A shadowy ship was entering from the North, 
And like the shadow of that shadow slipped 
The Golden Hyndc beside her thro' the gloom; 
And side by side they anchored in the port 
Amidst the shipping! Over the dark tide 
A small boat from the customs-house drew near. 
A sleepy, yawning, gold-laced officer 
Boarded the Golden Hynde, and with a cry, 
Stumbling against a cannon-butt, he saw 
The bare-armed British seamen in the gloom 
All waiting by their guns. Wildly he plunged 
Over the side and urged his boat away, 
Crying, "El Draque! El Draque!" At that dread word 
The darkness filled with clamour, and the ships, 
Cutting their cables, drifted here and there 
In mad attempts to seek the open sea. 
Wild lights burnt hither and thither, and all the port, 



 335 

One furnace of confusion, licavcd and seethed 
In terror; for each shadow of the night, 
Nay, the great night itself, was all Kl Draquc. 
The Dragon's wings were spread from quay to quay, 
The very lights that burnt from mast to mast 
And flared across the tide kindled his breath 
To fire; while here and there a British pinnace 
Slipped softly thro' the roaring gloom and glare, 
Ransacking ship by ship; for each one thought 
A fleet had come upon them. Each gave up 
The struggle as each was boarded; while, elsewhere, 
Cannon to cannon, friends bombarded friends. 

Yet not one ounce of treasure in Callao 

They found; for, fourteen days before they came, 

That greatest treasure-ship of Spain, with all 

The gorgeous harvest of that year, had sailed 

For Panama: her ballast — silver bars; 

Her cargo — rubies, emeralds, and gold. 

Out through the clamour and the darkness, out, 

Out to the harbour mouth, the Golden Hynde, 

Steered by the iron soul of Drake, returned: 

And where the way was blocked, her cannon clove 

A crimson highway to the midnight sea. 

Then Northward, Northward, o'er the jewelled main. 

Under the white moon like a storm they drove 

In quest of the Cacafuego. Fourteen days 

Her start was; and at dawn the fair wind sank. 

And chafing lay the Golden Hynde, becalmed; 

While, on the hills, the Viceroy of Peru 

Marched down from Lima with two thousand men, 

And sent out four huge ships of war to sink 

Or capture the fierce Dragon. Loud laughed  

To see them creeping nigh, urged with great oars, 

Then suddenly pause; for none would be the first 

To close with him. And, ere they had steeled their hearts 

To battle, a fair breeze broke out anew. 

And Northward sped the little Golden Hynde 

In quest of the lordliest treasure-ship of Spain. 



3tJ5  

Behind her lay a world in arms; for now 

Wrath and confusion clamoured for revenge 

From sea to sea. Spain claimed the pirate's head 

From England, and awaited his return 

With all her tortures. And where'er he passed 

He sowed the dragon's teeth, and everywhere 

Cadmean broods of armed men arose 

And followed, followed on his fiery trail. 

Men toiled at Lima to fit out a fleet 

Grim enough to destroy him. All night long 

The flare went up from cities on the coast 

Where men like naked devils toiled to cast 

Cannon that might have overwhelmed the powers 

Of Michael when he drave that hideous rout 

Through livid chaos to the black abyss. 

Small hope indeed there seemed of safe return; 

But Northward sped the little Golden Hynde, 

The world-watched midget ship of eighteen guns, 

Undaunted; and upon the second dawn 

Sighted a galleon, not indeed the chase. 

Yet worth a pause; for out of her they took — 

Embossed with emeralds large as pigeon's eggs — 

A golden crucifix, with eighty pounds 

In weight of gold. The rest they left behind; 

And onward, onward, to the North they flew — 

A score of golden miles, a score of green, 

An hundred miles, eight hundred miles of foam, 

Rainbows and nre, ransacking as they went 

Ship after ship for news o' the chase and gold: 

Learning from every capture that they drew 

Nearer and nearer. At Truxillo, dim 

And dreaming city, a-drowse with purple flowers. 

She had paused, ay, paused to take a freight of gold! 

At Paita — she had passed two days in front, 

Only two days, two days ahead; nay, one! 

At Quito, close inshore, a youthful page. 

Bright-eyed, ran up the rigging and cried, ''A sail! 

A sail ! The Cacafuego! And the chain 

Is mine !" And by the strange cut of her sails, 

Whereof they had been told in Callao, 

They knew her! 



 337 

Heavily laden with her gems, 
Lazily drifting with her golden fruitage, 
Over the magic seas they saw her hull 
Loom as they onward drew; but Drake, for fear 
The prey might take alarm and run ashore, 
Trailed wine-skins, filled with water, over the side 
To hold his ship back, till the darkness fell. 
And with the night the off-shore wind arose. 
At last the sun sank down, tiie rosy light 
Faded from Andes' j)eaked and bosomed snow: 
The night-wind rose: the wine-skins were up-hauled; 
And, like a hound unleashed, the Golden Ilynde 
Leapt forward thro' the gloom. 

A cable's length 
Divided them. The Cacafucgo heard 
A rough voice in the darkness bidding her 
Heave to! She held her course.  gave the word. 
A broadside shattered the night, and over her side 
Her main-yard clattered like a broken wing! 
On to her decks the British sea-dogs swarmed, 
Cutlass in hand: that fight was at an end. 

The ship was cleared, a prize crew placed a-board, 

Then both ships turned their heads to the open sea. 

At dawn, being out of sight of land, they 'gan 

Examine the great prize. None ever knew 

Save  and Gloriana what wild wealth 

They had captured there. Thus much at least was known: 

An hundredweight of gold, and twenty tons 

Of silver bullion; thirteen chests of coins; 

Nuggets of gold unnumbered; countless pearls, 

Diamonds, emeralds; but the worth of these 

Was past all reckoning. In the crimson dawn, 

Ringed with the lonely pomp of sea and sky, 

The naked-footed seamen bathed knee-deep 

In gold and gathered up Aladdin's fruit — 

All-colored gems — and tossed them in the sun. 

The hold like one great elfin orchard gleamed 

With dusky globes and tawny glories piled, 

Hesperian apples, heap on mellow heap. 

Rich with the hues of sunset, rich and ripe 

22 



 



--_ " - :^ iz es:h bnming orb: 

The::- :.. : ,^-, ^.ives iz rverv cliiz. 



BOOK VI 

Ne'er liir "Lif- s:-zl ::' C^r r±r on liie sea 
Glrrrrz-e^i ihe G:'":-;-- JT, '.if. szd all her h^irt 
7-:- '" :---:^ -- ^- : :": : Asa cL:": ::' zzis 

^z"R^y. sir: ;: .' 
E V 1 h, so £ze 

_zTTT. Yet the Trorld 
V.'^ . _ ~' ' on fieet 

Ats-^: 

■ : _. _: „ ; ■ :_ :l. 'LLcir chimes 

" : - :_ " ' To ihe Sonih 

_-. ' : :_an'5 STraJts, 

^_: - - , . libf hoimds, 

"^' .T-sTnerer: l Drake, 

j-_ . :t *ji? D:: : :. : ' : ireams. 
7 ■ -~T his thundei? and c-onTev, 
_ -_ _ .: . : . : :iv ba-ct t^o Spain. 

And I'-'--^ ■ -ziri oz: E^d sdd. •*Mt Trusty la-ds 

Of Dz „i"r n_iie tne 'wide world ring 

With L_^-^_ - ~ nan:e : you Lare swept one liali the seas 

From skr to skr: and in our oaken hold 

Y:z zare packed the ^or^eons Indies. We siiall sail 

r :: ilo-trlr Tsith snch wealth. If we retnm, 

Wr are one against t<en thonsand! We wiH seek 

The fsbled Xorthem passage, take otu gold 

S: ' ' ■ ' then out t^ sea again and trr 

C . . - - - -. gainst their guns."' 



And as thev sailed 
Xorthward. ther swooped on warm blue Guatulco 
For food and water. Xigh the dreaming port 



 

The grand alcaldes in Lizh '!o::'!lATe »at. 
Blazing with goid and scarlet, a^ iiiej zritai 
A batch <rf negro daves apon riie -^LinR 
Of kflenfflff in Spanish rr. ir.es : d-inb •iAT«?s. 
With bare scarred backs ar.d l^io^ir-cr^.sceti kz:e<25. 
And sorrowful eyes like *Jio«=e ot -s^t&rjtd 'i±L^ 
Spent from the pfooghinz- ET-rr. a^ 'iie /irir* 
Roee to condemn them lo "Jie k:L'-r:rii lirii 
The Briti^ boat's creTr. c lie* ini 'rrmract, 
Ent«ed the coarc The zrin . lii-rlil zi^jt* 
Grew wida* wrii amazene:!-. ini -Jie ,^i4r» 
Staggered against his gildeii iLrine. 

AhnightT God,*' cried Drake. * "scio Li*i- zTren me ^iiis 
— ^That I who once, in izz-orarLCtr. pr;<nr'T^i 
Saves for the golden hsi^Tfrdj-trjJz^ .:f Sraiz. 
May now, in England's nazne. Lelp "o r'rc-ir.e 
Tha: wron^. For now I saj in. "F-r".-i.ri'i nirac. 
Where'er ha' standard fies. ^e =LiT^ -r.-?-~ frjLad 
Upright, the shackles faZ ircin. cif Lii "'^ '•:»?■ 
Unyoke the priscKies: teil iLem iLey irr zieii 



^or 



An-i ^ 

Ukr i f^ri- -: 



r?40  

And Xorthwnrd. till the soft luxurious coasts 

Hardened, the winds grew bleak, the great green waves 

Loomed high like mountains round them, and the spray 

Froze on their spars and yards. Fresh from the warmth 

Of tropic seas the men could hardly brook 

That cold; and when the floating hills of ice 

Like huge green shadows crowned with ghostly snow 

Went past them with strange whispers in the gloom, 

Or took mysterious colours in the dawn, 

Their hearts misgave them, and they found no way; 

But all was iron shore and icy sea. 

And one by one the crew fell sick to death 

In that fierce ^nnter. and the land still ran 

Westward and showed no passage. Tossed \\-ith storms, 

Onward they plunged, or furrowed gentler tides 

Of ice-lit emerald that made the prow 

A faery beak of some enchanted ship 

Flinging wild rainbows round her as she drove 

Thro' seas unsailed by mortal mariners. 

Past isles unhailed of any human voice, 

Where sound and silence mingled in one song 

Of utter solitude. Ever as they went 

The flag of England blazoned the broad breeze, 

Northward, where never ship had sailed before, 

Northward, till lost in helpless wonderment, 

Dazed as a soul awakening from the dream 

Of death to some wild dawn in Paradise 

(Yet burnt with cold as they whose very tears 

Freeze on their faces where Cocytus wails) 

All world-worn, bruised, wing-broken, 'RTacked, and wrenched, 

Blackened -^-ith lightning, scarred as with evil deeds, 

But all embalmed in beauty by that sun 

Which never sets, bosomed m peace at last 

The Gohien Hynde rocked on a glittering calm. 

Seas that no ship had ever sailed, from sky 

To glistening sky. swept round them. Glory and gleam, 

Glamour and lucid rapture and diamond air 

Embraced her broken spars, begrimed with gold 

Her gloomy hull, rocking upon a sphere 

New made, it seemed, mysterious with the first 

Mj'stery of the world, vrhere holy sky 



 341 

And sacred sea shone like the primal Light 
Of God, a-stir with wlii.speiinj:; sea-bird's wings 
And glorious with clouds. Only, all day, 
All night, the rhythmic utterance of His will 
In the deep sigh of seas that washed His tiirone, 
Rose and relapsed across Eternity, 
Timed to the pulse of leons. All their world 
Seemed strange as unto us the great new heavens 
And glittering shores, if on some aery bark 
To Saturn's coasts we came and traced no more 
The tiny gleam of our familiar earth 
Far ofT, but heard tremendous oceans roll 
Round unimagined continents, and saw 
Terrible mountains unto which our Alps 
Were less than mole-hills, and such gaunt ra\anes 
Cleaving them and such cataracts roaring down 
As burst the gates of our earth-moulded senses, 
Pour the eternal glory on our souls. 
And, while ten thousand chariots bring the dawn, 
Hurl us poor midgets trembling to our knees. 
Glory and glamour and rapture of lucid air, 
Ice cold, with subtle colours of the sky 
Embraced her broken spars, belted her hulk 
With brilliance, while she dipped her jacinth beak 
In waves of mounded splendour, and sometimes 
A great ice-mountain flashed and floated by 
Throned on the waters, pinnacled and crowned 
With all the smouldering jewels in the world; 
Or in the darkness, glimmering berg on berg, 
All emerald to the moon, went by like ghosts 
Whispering to the South. 

There, as they lay, 
Waiting a wind to fill the stiffened sails, 
Their hearts remembered that in England now 
The Spring was nigh, and in that lonely sea 
The skilled musicians filled their eyes with home. 



342  

SONG 
I 

It is the Spring-tide now! 
Under the hawthorn-bough 

The milkmaid goes: 
Her eyes are violets blue 
Washed with the morning dew. 

Her mouth a rose. 

It is the Spring-tide now. 



II 

The lanes are growing 

The lambkins frisk and bleat 

In all the meadows: 
The glossy dappled kine 
Blink in the warm sunshine, 

Cooling their shadows. 
It is the Spring-tide now. 



Ill 

Soon hand in sunburnt hand 
Thro' God's green fairyland, 

England, our home, 
Whispering as they stray 
Adown the primrose wo,y, 

Lovers will roam. 

It is the Spring-tide now. 

And then, with many a chain of linked sweetness, 
Harmonious gold, they drew their hearts and soul? 
Back, back to England, thoughts of wife and child 
Mother and sweetheart and the old companions, 
The twisted streets of London and the deep 
Delight of Devon lanes, all softly voiced 
In words or cadences, made them breathe hard 
And gaze across the everlasting sea. 
Craving for that small isle so far away. 



 343 

SONG 

I 

0, you beautiful land, 

Dccp-bosomcd with beeches and bright 
With the flowery largesse of May 
Sweet from the palm of her hand 
Out-flung, till the hedges grew white 
As the green-arched billows with spray. 

II 

White from the fall of her feet 
The daisies awake in the sun ! 
Cliff-side and valley and plain 
With the breath of the thyme growing sweet 
Laugh, for the Spring is begun; 

And Love hath turned homeward again. 

0, you beautiful land! 



Ill 

Where should the home be of Love, 

But there, where the hawthorn-tree blows, 
And the milkmaid trips out with her pail, 
And the skylark in heaven above 
Sings, till the West is a rose 
And the East is a nightingale? 

0, you beautiful land! 

IV 

There where the sycamore trees 
Are shading the satin-skinned kine, 
And oaks, whose brethren of old 
Conquered the strength of the seas, 
Grow broad in the sunlight and shine 
Crowned with their cressets of gold; 

0, you bcaidiful land! 



544 DRAIvE 

V 

Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright 
With rose-coloured cloudlets above; 
Billowing broad and grand 
Wliere the meadows "U'ith blossom are white 
For the foot-fall, the foot-fall of Love. 
0, 3'ou beautiful land! 



VI 



How should we sing of thy beauty, 
England, mother of men. 

We that can look in thine eyes 
And see there the splendour of duty 
Deep as the depth of their ken, 
Wide as the ring of thy skies. 



VII 

0, you beautifvl land, 

Deep-bosomed with beeches and bright 
With the flowery largesse of May 
Sweet from the palm of her hand 
Out-flung, till the hedges grew ivhite 
As the green-arched billows with spray, 

0, you beautiful land! 



And w^hen a fair wind rose again, there seemed 
No hope of passage by that fabled way 
Northward, and suddenly  put down his helm 
And, with some wondrous purpose in his eyes, 
Turned Southward once again, until he found 
A lonely natural harbour on the coast 
Near San Francisco, where the cliffs were white 
Like those of England, and the soft soil teemed 
With gold. There they careened the Golden Hyndc — 



 345 

Her keel being thick with barnacles and weeds — 

And built a fort and dockyard to refit 

Tlieir little wandering home, not half so large 

As many a coasting barque to-day that scarce 

Would cross the Channel, yet she had swept the seas 

Of half the world, and even now jjrepared 

For nev.' adventures greater than them all. 

And as the sound of chisel and hammer broke 

The stillness of that shore, shy figures came, 

Keen-faced and grave-eyed Indians, from the woods 

To bow before the strange white-faced newcomers 

As gods. Whereat the chaplain all aghast 

Persuaded them with signs and broken words 

And grunts that even  was but a man, 

Whom none the less the savages would crown 

With woven flowers and barbarous ritual 

King of New Albion — so the seamen called 

That land, remembering the white chffs of home. 

IMucli they implored, with many a sign and cry, 

Which by the rescued slaves upon the prize 

Were part interpreted, that  would stay 

And rule them; and the vision of the great 

I^mpire of Englishmen arose and flashed 

A moment round them, on that lonely shore. 

A small and weather-beaten band they stood, 

Bronzed seamen by the laughing rescued slaves, 

Ringed with gigantic loneliness and saw 

An Empire that should liberate the world; 

A Power before the lightning of whose arms 

Darkness should die and all oppression cease; 

A Federation of the strong and weak, 

Whereby the weak were strengthened and the strong 

]\Iade stronger in the increasing good of all; 

A gathering up of one another's loads; 

A turning of the wasteful rage of war 

To accomphsh large and fruitful tasks of peace. 

Even as the strength of some great stream is turned 

To grind the corn for bread. E'en thus on England 

That splendour dawned which those in dreams foresaw 

And saw not with their living eyes, but thou, 

England, mayst lift up eyes at last and see. 



346 drai^:e 

Who, like that angel of the Apocalypse 
Hast set one foot upon thy sea-girt isle, 
The other upon the waters, and canst raise 
Now, if thou wilt, above the assembled nations, 
The trumpet of deliverance to thy lips. 

At last their task was done, the Goldfn Hynde 

Undocked, her white wings hoisted; and away 

Westward they swiftly glided from the shore 

Where, with a wild lament, their Indian friends, 

Knee-deep i' the creaming foam, all stood at gaze, 

Like men that for one moment in their lives 

Have seen a mighty drama cross their path 

And played upon the stage of vast events 

Knowing, henceforward, all their life is nought. 

But Westward sped the little Golden Hynde 

Across the uncharted ocean, with no guide 

But that great homing cry of all their hearts. 

Far out of sight of land they steered, straight out 

Across the great Pacific, in those days 

When even the compass proved no trusty guide. 

Straight out they struck in that small bark, straight out 

Week after week, without one glimpse of aught 

But heaving seas, across the uncharted waste 

Straight to the sunset. Laughingly they sailed, 

With all that gorgeous booty in their holds, 

A splendour dragging deep through seas of doom, 

A prey to the first great hurricane that blew 

Except their God averted it. And still 

Their skilled musicians cheered the way along 

To shores bej^ond the sunset and the sea. 

And oft at nights, the yellow fo'c'sle lanthorn 

Swung over swarthy singing faces grouped 

Within the four small wooden walls that made 

Their home and shut them from the unfathomable 

Depths of mysterious gloom without that rolled 

All around them; or Tom Moone would heartily troll 

A simple stave that struggled oft with thoughts 

Beyond its reach, yet reached their hearts no less. 



 347 

SONG 

I 

Good luck befall you, mariners all 

That sail this worhl so iridc! 
Whither ire go, not yet we know: 

ire steer by wind and tide. 
Be it right or wrong, I sing this song; 

For now it seems to mc 
Men steer their soils thr ' r cks and shoals 

As marinerc use by sea. 

Chorus: As mariners use by sea, 
My lads. 
As mariners use by sea! 



II 



And now they plough to windward, now 

They drive before the gale! 
Now are they hurled aeross the world 

With torn and tattered sail; 
Yet, as they will, they steer and still 

Defy the world's rude glee: 
Till death overwhelm them, mast and helm, 

They ride and rule the sea. 

Chorus: They ride and rule the sea, 
My lads, 
They ride and rule the sea! 



Meantime, in England, Bess of Sydenham, 

Drake's love and queen, being told that  was dead, 

And numbed with grief, obeying her father's will 

That dreadful summer morn in bridal robes 

Had passed to wed her father's choice. The sun 

Streamed smiling on her as she went, half-dazed, 

Amidst her smiling maids. Nigh to the sea 



348  

The church was, and the mellow marriage bells 

IMixed with its music. Far away, white sails 

Spangled the sapphire, white as flying blossoms 

New-fallen from her crown; but as the glad 

And sad procession neared the little church, 

From some strange ship-of-war, far out at sea, 

There came a sudden tiny puff of smoke — 

And then a dull strange throb, a whistling hiss, 

And scarce a score of yards away a shot 

Ploughed up the turf. None knew, none ever knew 

From whence it came, whether a perilous jest 

Of English seamen, or a wanton deed 

Of Spaniards, or mere accident; but all 

Her maids in flight were scattered. Bess awoke 

As from a dream, crying aloud — " 'Tis he, 

'Tis he that sends this message. He is not dead. 

I will not pass the porch. Come home with me. 

'Twas he that sent that message.'' 

Nought availed, 
Her father's wTath, her mother's tears, her maids' 
Cunning persuasions, nought; home she returned, 
And waited for the dead to come to life; 
Nor waited long; for ere that month was out, 
Rumour on rumour reached the coasts of England, 
Borne as it seemed on sea-birds' wings, that  
Was on his homeward way. 

BOOK VII 

The imperial '^Tath of Spain, one world-wide sea 

Of furious pomp and flouted power, now surged 

All round this little isle, with one harsh roar 

Deepening for Drake's return — "The Golden Hynde 

Ye swore had foundered,  ye svv'ore was drowned; 

They are on their homeward way! The head of Drake! 

What answer, what account, what recompense 

Now can ye yield our might invincible 

Except the head of Drake, whose bloody deeds 

Have reddened the Pacific, who hath sacked 

Cities of gold, burnt fleets, and ruined realms. 

What answer but his life?" 



 349 

To which the Queen 
Who saw the storm of Europe slowly rising 
In a\vful menace o'er her wave-beat throne, 
And midmost of the storm, the ensanguined robes 
Of Rome and murderous hand, grasping the Cross 
By its great hilt, pointing it like a brand 
Blood-l)lackened at the throat of England, saw 
Like skeleton castles wTapt in rolling mist 
The monstrous engines and designs of war, 
The secret fleets and brooding panoplies 
Philip prepared, growing from day to day 
In dusk armipotent and embattled gloom 
Surrounding her, replied: "The life of Drake, 
If, on our strict enquiry, in due order 
We find that  have hurt our friends, mark well, 
If  have hurt our friends, the life of Drake." 



And while the world awaited him, as men 

Might wait an earthquake, quietly one grey morn, 

One grey October morn of mist and rain 

When all the \vindow-panes in Plymouth dripped 

With listless drizzle, and only through her streets 

Rumbled the death-cart with its dreary bell 

Monotonously plangent (for the plague 

Had lately like a vampire sucked the veins 

Of Plymouth town), a little weed-clogged ship, 

Grey as a ghost, glided into the Sound 

And anchored, scarce a soul to see her come, 

And not an eye to read the faded scroll 

Around her battered prow — the Golden Hyndc. 

Then, thro' the dumb grey misty listless port, 

A rumour like the colours of the dawn 

Streamed o'er the shining quaj's, up the wet streets. 

In at the tavern doors, flashed from the panes 

And turned them into diamonds, fired the pools 

In every muddy lane with Spanish gold, 

Flushed in a thousand faces,  is come! 

Down every crowding alley the urchins leaped 

Tossing their caps, the Golden Hynde is come! 



350  

Fisherman, citizen, prentice, dame and maid, 

Fat justice, floury baker, bloated butcher, 

Fishwife, minister and apothecary. 

Yea, even the driver of the death-cart, leaving 

His ghastly load, using his dreary bell 

To merrier purpose, down the seething streets, 

Panting, tumbling, jostling, helter-skelter 

To the water-side, to the water-side they rushed, 

And some knee-deep beyond it, all one wild 

Welcome to Francis Drake! 

Wild kerchiefs fluttering, thunderous hurrahs 

Rolling from quay to quay, a thousand arms 

Outstretched to that grey ghostly little ship 

At whose masthead the British flag still flew; 

Then, over all, in one tumultuous tide 

Of pealing joy, the Plymouth bells outclashed 

A nation's welcome home to Francis Drake. 

The very Golden Hynde, no idle dream. 

The little ship that swept the Spanish Main, 

Carelessly lying there, in Plymouth Sound, 

The Golden Hynde, the wonder of the world, 

A glory wrapt her greyness, and no boat 

Dared yet approach, save one, with Drake's close friends, 

Who came to warn him: ''England stands alone 

And  is made the price of England's peace. 

The Queen, perforce, must temporise with Spain, 

The Invincible! She hath forfeited thy life 

To Spain, against her will. Only by this 

Rejection of thee as a privateer 

She averted instant war; for now the menace 

Of Spain draws nigher, looms darker every hour. 

The world is made Spain's footstool. Philip, the King, 

E'en now hath added to her boundless power 

Without a blow, the vast domains and wealth 

Of Portugal, and deadlier yet, a coast 

That crouches over against us. Cadiz holds 

A huge Armada, none knows where to strike; 

And even this day a flying horseman brought 

Rumours that Spain hath landed a great force 

In Ireland. Mary of Scotland only waits 



 351 

The word to stab us in the side for Rome. 

The Queen, weighed down by Burleigh nnd tlie friends 

Of peace at any cost, may yet be driven 

To make thy life our ransom, which indeed 

She liatii already sworn, or seemed to swear." 

To whom  answered, "Gloriana lives; 
And in her life mine only fear lies dead, 
Mine only fear, for luigland, not myself. 
Willing am I and glad, as 1 have lived, 
To die for England's sake. 
Yet, lest the Queen be driven now to restore 
This cargo that I bring her — a world's wealth, 
The golden sj)rings of all the power of Spain, 
The jewelled hearts of all those cruel realms 
(For I have plucked them out) beyond the sea; 
Lest she be driven to yield them up again 
For Spain and Spain's delight, I will warp out 
Behind St. Nicholas' Island. The fierce plague 
In Plymouth shall be colour and excuse. 
Until my courier return from court 
With Gloriana's will. If it be death, 
I'll out again to sea, strew its rough floor 
With costlier largesses than kings can throw, 
And, ere I die, will singe the Spaniard's beard 
And set the fringe of his imperial robe 
Blazing along his coasts. Then let him roll 
His galleons round the little Golden Hynde, 
Bring her to bay, if he can, on the high seas, 
Ring us about with thousands, we'll not yield, 
I and my Golden Hynde, we will go down, 
W^ith flag still flying on the last stump left us 
And all my cannon spitting out the fires 
Of everlasting scorn into his face." 

So  warped out the Golden Hijnde anew 
Behind St. Nicholas' Island. She lay there, 
The small grey-golden centre of the world 
That raged all round her, the last hope, the star 
Of Protestant freedom, she, the outlawed ship 
Holding within her the great head and heart 



352  

Of England's ocean power; and all tlie fleets 
That have enfranchised earth, in that small ship, 
Lay waiting for their doom. 

Past her at night 
Fisher-boats glided, wondering as they heard 
In the thick darkness the great songs they deemed 
Must oft have risen from many a lonely sea; 
For oft had Spaniards brought a rumour back 
Of that strange pirate who in royal state 
Sailed to a sound of violins, and dined 
With skilled musicians round him, turning all 
Battle and storm and death into a song. 

SONG 

The same Sun is o'er us. 

The same Love shall find us, 

The same and none other 

Wherever we be; 

With the same hope before us, 

The same home behind us, 

England, our mother. 

Ringed round with the sea. 

No land in the ring of it 
Now, all around us 
Only the splendid 
Re-surging unknown; 
How should we sing of it. 
This that hath found us 
By the great stars attended 
At midnight, alone? 

Our highway none knoweth. 

Yet our blood hath discerned it! 
Clear, clear is our path now 
Wliose foreheads are free 
Where the hurricane bloweth 
Our spirits have learned it, 

'Tis the highway of wTath, now, 
The storm's way, the sea. 



 353 

When the waters lay breathless 
Gazing at Hesper 

Guarding that glorious 
Fruitage of gold, 
Heard we the deathless 
Wonderful whisper 
We follow, victorious 
To-night, as of old. 

Ah, the broad miles of it 
White with the onset 
Of waves without number 
Warring for glee; 
Ah, the soft smiles of it 
Down to the sunset, 
Sacred for slumber 

The swan's bath, the sea! 

When the breakers charged thundering 
In thousands all round us 
With a lightning of lances 
Up-hurtled on high, 
When the stout ships were sundering 
A rapture hath crowned us 
Like the wild light that dances 
On the crests that flash by. 

Our highway none knoweth, 
Yet our blood hath discerned it! 
Clear, clear is our path now 
Whose foreheads are free, 
Where Euroclydon hlowelh 
Our spirits have learned it, 

'Tis the highway of wrath, now, 
The storm 's way, the sea! 

Who now will follow us 

Where England's flag leadeth us, 
Where gold not inveigles. 
Nor statesmen betray? 



354.  

Tho' the deep midnight swallow us 
Let her cry when she needeth us, 
We return, her sea-eagles, 
The hurricane's way. 

For the same Sun is o'er us, 
The same Love shall find us, 
The same and none other 
Wherever we he; 
With the same hope before us, 
The same home behind us, 
England, our mother, 

Ringed round with the sea. 

So six days passed, and on the seventh returned 

The courier, with a message from the Queen 

Summoning  to court, bidding him bring 

Also such curious trifles of his voyage 

As might amuse her, also be of good cheer 

She bade him, and rest well content his life 

In Gloriana's hands were safe: so  

Laughingly landed with his war-bronzed crew 

Amid the wide-eyed throng on Plymouth beach 

And loaded twelve big pack-horses with pearls 

Beyond all price, diamonds, crosses of gold. 

Rubies that smouldered once for Aztec kings, 

And great dead Incas' gem-encrusted crowns. 

Also, he said, we'll add a sack or twain 

Of gold doubloons, pieces of eight, moidores. 

And such-like Spanish trash, for those poor lords 

At court, lilies that toil not neither spin. 

Wherefore, methinks their purses oft grow lean 

In these harsh times. 'Twere even as well their tongues 

Wagged in our favour, now, as in our blame. 



Six days thereafter a fearful whisper reached 
Mendoza, plenipotentiary of Spain 
In London, that the pirate  was now 
In secret conference with the Queen, nay more, 



 355 

That he, the Master-thief of the frj^ldcn world, 

Drake, even he, that bloody buccaneer, 

Had six hours' audience with her Majesty 

Daily, nay more, walked with her in her garden 

Alone, among the fiery Autumn leaves, 

Talking of God knows what, and suddenly 

The temporizing diplomatic voice 

Of caution he was wont to expect from England 

And blandl}'- accept as his imperial due 

Changed to a ringing key of firm resolve. 

Resistance, nay, defiance. For when he came 

Demanding audience of the Queen, behold, 

Her officers of state with mouths awry 

Informed the high ambassador of Spain, 

Despite his pomp and circumstance, the Queen 

Could not receive him, being in conference 

With some rough seaman, pirate, what you will, 

A fellow made of bronze, a buccaneer, 

Maned like a lion, bearded like a pard, 

With hammered head, clamped jaws, and great deep eyes 

That burned with fierce blue colours of the brine, 

And liked not Spain — Drake! 'Twas the very name. 

One Francis Drake! a Titan that had stood. 

Thundering commands against the thundering heavens. 

On lightning-shattered, storm-swept decks and drunk 

Great draughts of glory from the rolling sea, 

El Draque! El Draque! Nor could she promise aught 

To Spain's ambassador, nor see his face 

Again, while yet one Spanish musketeer 

Remained in Ireland. 

Vainly the Spaniard raged 
Of restitution, recompense; for now 
Had  brought up the little Golden Ilynde 
To London, and the rumor of her wealth 
Out-topped the wild reality. The crew 
Were princes as they swaggered down the streets 
In weather-beaten splendour. Out of their doors 
To wonder and stare the jostling citizens ran 
When They went by; and through the length and breadth 
Of England, now, the gathering glory of life 
Shone like the dawn. O'er hill and dale it streamed. 



356  

Dawn, everlasting and almighty dawn, 
Making a golden pomp of every oak — 
Had not its British brethren swept the seas? — 
In each remotest hamlet, by the hearth, 
The cart, the grey church-porch, the village pump 
By meadow and mill and old manorial hall, 
By turnpike and by tavern, farm and forge. 
Men staved the crimson vintage of romance 
And held it up against the light and drank it, 
And with it drank confusion to the wrath 
That menaced England, but eternal honour, 
While blood ran in their veins, to Francis Drake. 



BOOK VIII 

Meanwhile, young Bess of Sydenham, the queen 

Of Drake's deep heart, emprisoned in her home. 

Fenced by her father's angry watch and ward 

Lest he — the poor plebeian dread of Spain, 

Shaker of nations, king of the untamed seas — 

Might win some word with her, sweet Bess, the flower 

Triumphant o'er their rusty heraldries. 

Waited her lover, as in ancient tales 

The pale princess from some grey wizard's tower 

Midmost the deep sigh of enchanted woods 

Looks for the starry flash of her knight's shield; 

Or on the further side o' the magic West 

Sees pushing through the ethereal golden gloom 

Some blurred black prow, with loaded colours coarse, 

Clouded with sunsets of a mortal sea, 

And rich with earthly crimson. She, with lips 

Apart, still waits the shattering golden thrill 

When it shall grate the coasts of Fairyland. 

Only, to Bess of Sydenham, there came 
No sight or sound to break that frozen spell 
And lonely watch, no message from her love. 
Or none that reached her restless helpless hands. 
Only the general rumour of the world 
Borne to her by the gossip of her maid 



 357 

Kept the swift pictures passing througli her brain 

Of how the Golden Hynde was hauled ashore 

At Deptford through a sea of exultation, 

And by the (Queen's command was now set up 

For an everlasting memory! 

Of how the Queen with subtle statecraft still 

Kept Spain at arm's-length, dangling, while she played 

At fast and loose with France, w^hosc embassy, 

Arriving with the marriage-treaty, found 

(And trembled at her daring, since the wTath 

Of Spain seemed, in their eyes, to flake with foam 

The storm-beat hulk) a gorgeous banquet spread 

To greet them on that ver}'- Golden Hynde 

Which sacked the Spanish main, a gorgeous feast, 

The like of which old England had not seen 

Since the bluff days of boisterous king Hal, 

Great shields of brawn with mustard, roasted swans, 

Haunches of venison, roasted chines of beef. 

And chewets baked, big olive-pyes thereto, 

And sallets mixed with sugar and cinnamon, 

White ^vine, rose-water, and candied eringoes. 

There, on the outlawed ship, whose very name 

Rang like a blasphemy in the imperial ears 

Of Spain (its every old worm-eaten plank 

Being scored with scorn and courage that not storm 

Nor death, nor all their Inquisition racks. 

The white-hot irons and bloody branding whips 

That scarred the backs of Ptome's pale galley-slaves. 

Her captured English seamen, ever could daunt), 

There with huge Empires waiting for one word. 

One breath of colour and excuse, to leap 

Like w^olves at the naked throat of her small isle. 

There in the eyes of the staggered w^orld she stood. 

Great Gloriana, while the live decks reeled 

With flash of jewels and flush of rustling silks. 

She stood wath Drake, the corsair, and her people 

Surged like a sea around. There did she give 

Open defiance wath her agate smile 

To Spain. ''Behold this pirate, now," she cried, 

"Whose head my Lord, the Invincible, Philip of Spain 

Demands from England. Kneel dowai. Master Drake, 



358  

Kneel down; for now have I this gilded sword 
Wherewith to strike it off. Nay, thou my lord 
Ambassador of France, since I be woman, 
And squeamish at the sight of blood, give thou 
The accolade." With that jest she gave the hilt 
(Thus, even in boldness, playing a crafty part, 
And dangling France before the adventurous deed) 
To Marchaumont; and in the face of Europe, 
With that huge fleet in Cadiz and the whole 
World-power of Spain crouching around her isle, 
Knighted the master-thief of the unknown world, 
Sir Francis Drake. 

And then the rumour came 
Of vaster privateerings planned by  
Against the coasts of Philip; but held in check 
And fretting at the leash, as ever the Queen 
Clung to her statecraft, while Drake's enemies 
Worked in the dark against him. Spain had set 
An emperor's ransom on his life. At home 
John Doughty, treacherous brother of that traitor 
Who met his doom by Drake's own hand, intrigued 
With Spain abroad and Spain's dark emissaries 
At home to avenge his brother. Burleigh still 
Beset Drake's path with pitfalls: treacherous greed 
For Spain's blood-money daggered all the dark 
Around him, and John Doughty without cease 
Sought to make use of all; until, by chance, 
 gat the proof of treasonable intrigue 
With Spain, against him, up to the deadly hilt. 
And hurled him into the Tower. 

Many a night 
She sat by that old casement nigh the sea 
And heard its ebb and flow. With soul erect 
And splendid now she waited, yet there came 
No message; and, she thought, he hath seen at last 
My little worth. And when her maiden sang. 
With white throat throbbing softly in the dusk 
And fingers gently straying o'er the lute. 
As was her wont at twilight, some old song 
Of high disdainful queens and lovers pale 
Pining a thousand years before their feet. 






See they come, post haste from Thanet,
Lovely couple, side by side;
They've left behind them Richard Kennet
With the Parents of the Bride! 
Canterbury they have passed through;
Next succeeded Stamford-bridge;
Chilham village they came fast through;
Now they've mounted yonder ridge. 

Down the hill they're swift proceeding,
Now they skirt the Park around;
Lo! The Cattle sweetly feeding
Scamper, startled at the sound! 

Run, my Brothers, to the Pier gate!
Throw it open, very wide!
Let it not be said that we're late
In welcoming my Uncle's Bride! 

To the house the chaise advances;
Now it stops--They're here, they're here!
How d'ye do, my Uncle Francis?
How does do your Lady dear? 


Miss Lloyd has now sent to Miss Green,
As, on opening the box, may be seen,
Some years of a Black Ploughman's Gauze,
To be made up directly, because
Miss Lloyd must in mourning appear
For the death of a Relative dear--
Miss Lloyd must expect to receive
This license to mourn and to grieve,
Complete, ere the end of the week--
It is better to write than to speak 

Happy the lab'rer in his Sunday clothes!
In light-drab coat, smart waistcoat, well-darn'd hose,
Andhat upon his head, to church he goes;
As oft, with conscious pride, he downward throws
A glance upon the ample cabbage rose
That, stuck in button-hole, regales his nose,
He envies not the gayest London beaux.
In church he takes his seat among the rows,
Pays to the place the reverence he owes,
Likes best the prayers whose meaning least he knows,
Lists to the sermon in a softening doze,
And rouses joyous at the welcome close. 

Ever musing I delight to tread 
The Paths of honour and the Myrtle Grove 
Whilst the pale Moon her beams doth shed 
On disappointed Love. 
While Philomel on airy hawthorn Bush 
Sings sweet and Melancholy, And the thrush 
Converses with the Dove. 

2

Gently brawling down the turnpike road, 
Sweetly noisy falls the Silent Stream-- 
The Moon emerges from behind a Cloud 
And darts upon the Myrtle Grove her beam. 
Ah! then what Lovely Scenes appear, 
The hut, the Cot, the Grot, and Chapel queer, 
And eke the Abbey too a mouldering heap, 
Cnceal'd by aged pines her head doth rear 
And quite invisible doth take a peep. 


Oh! Mr. Best, you're very bad
And all the world shall know it;
Your base behaviour shall be sung
By me, a tunefull Poet.-- 
You used to go to Harrowgate
Each summer as it came,
And why I pray should you refuse
To go this year the same?-- 

The way's as plain, the road's as smooth,
The Posting not increased;
You're scarcely stouter than you were,
Not younger Sir at least.-- 

If e'er the waters were of use
Why now their use forego?
You may not live another year,
All's mortal here below.-- 

It is your duty Mr Best
To give your health repair.
Vain else your Richard's pills will be,
And vain your Consort's care. 

But yet a nobler Duty calls
You now towards the North.
Arise ennobled--as Escort
Of Martha Lloyd stand forth. 

She wants your aid--she honours you
With a distinguished call.
Stand forth to be the friend of her
Who is the friend of all.-- 

Take her, and wonder at your luck,
In having such a Trust.
Her converse sensible and sweet
Will banish heat and dust.-- 

So short she'll make the journey seem
You'll bid the Chaise stand still.
T'will be like driving at full speed
From Newb'ry to Speen hill.-- 

Convey her safe to Morton's wife
And I'll forget the past,
And write some verses in your praise
As finely and as fast. 

But if you still refuse to go
I'll never let your rest,
Buy haunt you with reproachful song
Oh! wicked Mr. Best!--    


I've a pain in my head' 
Said the suffering Beckford; 
To her Doctor so dread. 
'Oh! what shall I take for't?'

Said this Doctor so dread 
Whose name it was Newnham. 
'For this pain in your head 
Ah! What can you do Ma'am?'

Said Miss Beckford, 'Suppose 
If you think there's no risk, 
I take a good Dose 
Of calomel brisk.'--

'What a praise worthy Notion.' 
Replied Mr. Newnham. 
'You shall have such a potion 
And so will I too Ma'am.'


This little bag I hope will prove
To be not vainly made--
For, if you should a needle want
It will afford you aid. 
And as we are about to part
T'will serve another end,
For when you look upon the Bag
You'll recollect your friend 
Jane Austen

“Love is a promise; love is a souvenir, once given never forgotten, never let it disappear.” – John Lennon tweet

“All, everything that I understand, I only understand because I love.” — Leo Tolstoy tweet

“I swear I couldn’t love you more than I do right now, and yet I know I will tomorrow.” — Leo Christopher tweet

“At the touch of love everyone becomes a poet.” ― Plato tweet

The Greatest Love Poetry of All Time
Here you will find selected love poems and poetry by famous classical and contemporary poets for him. Also, nothing gets you feeling romantic quite like a little poetry.

Love One Another By Khalil Gibran (aka Kahlil Jubran)
How Do I Love Thee by Elizabeth Barrett Browning
A Drinking Song by W.B. Yeats
Another Valentine by Wendy Cope
Bright Star by John Keats
Meeting at Night by Robert Browning
My River by Emily Dickinson
Love’s Philosophy by Percy Bysshe Shelley
Wild Nights by Emily Dickinson
Poem to an Unnameable Man by Dorothea Lasky
To My Dear and Loving Husband by Anne Bradstreet
Poem for My Love by June Jordan
I Love You by Ella Wheeler Wilcox
Maud by Alfred, Lord Tennyson
Remember by Christina Rossetti
Love And Friendship by Emily Bronte
Love by Margaret Atwood
The Meeting by Katherine Mansfield
The Kis’ by Sara Teasdale
At Las’ by Elizabeth Akers Allen
You can enjoy our powerful inspirational poems from famous poets.

Love One Another By Khalil Gibran (aka Kahlil Jubran)
Love one another, but make not a bond of love.
Let it rather be a moving sea between the shores of your souls.
Fill each other’s cup, but drink not from one cup.
Give one another of your bread, but eat not from the same loaf.
Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone.
Even as the strings of a lute are alone though they quiver with the same music.
Give your hearts, but not into each other’s keeping.
For only the hand of life can contain your hearts.
And stand together, yet not too near together.
For the pillars of the temple stand apart.
And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in each other’s shadow.

How Do I Love Thee by Elizabeth Barrett Browning
How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
I love thee to the depth and breadth and height
My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight
For the ends of being and ideal grace.
I love thee to the level of every day’s
Most quiet need, by sun and candle-light.
I love thee freely, as men strive for right.
I love thee purely, as they turn from praise.
I love thee with the passion put to use
In my old griefs, and with my childhood’s faith.
I love thee with a love I seemed to lose
With my lost saints. I love thee with the breath,
Smiles, tears, of all my life; and, if God choose,
I shall but love thee better after death.

love poems for your boyfriend that will make him cry

 

A Drinking Song by W.B. Yeats
Wine comes in at the mouth
And love comes in at the eye;
That’s all we shall know for truth
Before we grow old and die.
I lift the glass to my mouth,
I look at you, and I sigh.

Famous Deep Love Poems by W.B. Yeats 

Another Valentine by Wendy Cope
Today we are obliged to be romantic
And think of yet another valentine.
We know the rules and we are both pedantic:
Today’s the day we have to be romantic.
Our love is old and sure, not new and frantic.
You know I’m yours and I know you are mine.
And saying that has made me feel romantic,
My dearest love, my darling valentine.

Another Valentine by Wendy Cope from Deep Famous Love Poems Collection

Bright Star by John Keats
Bright star, would I were stedfast as thou art–
Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night
And watching, with eternal lids apart,
Like nature’s patient, sleepless Eremite,
The moving waters at their priestlike task
Of pure ablution round earth’s human shores,
Or gazing on the new soft-fallen mask
Of snow upon the mountains and the moors–
No–yet still stedfast, still unchangeable,
Pillow’d upon my fair love’s ripening breast,
To feel for ever its soft fall and swell,
Awake for ever in a sweet unrest,
Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath,
And so live ever–or else swoon to death.

 ‘Bright Star’ by John Keats from Famous Deep Love Poetry Collection for him

Meeting at Night by Robert Browning
The gray sea and the long black land;
And the yellow half-moon large and low:
And the startled little waves that leap
In fiery ringlets from their sleep,
As I gain the cove with pushing prow,
And quench its speed i’ the slushy sand.

Then a mile of warm sea-scented beach;
Three fields to cross till a farm appears;
A tap at the pane, the quick sharp scratch
And blue spurt of a lighted match,
And a voice less loud, through joys and fears,
Than the two hearts beating each to each!

My River by Emily Dickinson
My river runs to thee.
Blue sea, wilt thou welcome me?
My river awaits reply.
Oh! sea, look graciously.

I’ll fetch thee brooks
from spotted nooks.
Say, sea, Take me!

deep meaningful love poems for him

Love’s Philosophy by Percy Bysshe Shelley
The fountains mingle with the river
And the rivers with the ocean,
The winds of heaven mix for ever
With a sweet emotion;
Nothing in the world is single;
All things by a law divine
In one spirit meet and mingle.
Why not I with thine?—

See the mountains kiss high heaven
And the waves clasp one another;
No sister-flower would be forgiven
If it disdained its brother;
And the sunlight clasps the earth
And the moonbeams kiss the sea:
What is all this sweet work worth
If thou kiss not me?

You might enjoy the selection of amazing love poems for her.

Wild Nights by Emily Dickinson
Wild Nights – Wild Nights!
Were I with thee
Wild Nights should be
Our luxury!

Futile – the winds –
To a heart in port –
Done with the compass –
Done with the chart!

Rowing in Eden –
Ah, the sea!
Might I moor – Tonight –
In thee!

deep love poems for him

Poem to an Unnameable Man by Dorothea Lasky
You have changed me already. I am a fireball
That is hurtling towards the sky to where you are
You can choose not to look up but I am a giant orange ball
That is throwing sparks upon your face
Oh look at them shake
Upon you like a great planet that has been murdered by change
O too this is so dramatic this shaking
Of my great planet that is bigger than you thought it would be
So you ran and hid
Under a large tree. She was graceful, I think
That tree although soon she will wither
Into ten black snakes upon your throat
And when she does I will be wandering as I always am
A graceful lady that is part museum
Of the voices of the universe everyone else forgets
I will hold your voice in a little box
And when you come upon me I won’t look back at you
You will feel a hand upon your heart while I place your voice back
Into the heart from where it came from
And I will not cry also
Although you will expect me to
I was wiser too than you had expected
For I knew all along you were mine

romantic poems for him to make him cry

To My Dear and Loving Husband by Anne Bradstreet
If ever two were one, then surely we.
If ever man were loved by wife, then thee.
If ever wife was happy in a man,
Compare with me, ye women, if you can.
I prize thy love more than whole mines of gold,
Or all the riches that the East doth hold.
My love is such that rivers cannot quench,
Nor ought but love from thee give recompense.
Thy love is such I can no way repay;
The heavens reward thee manifold, I pray.
Then while we live, in love let’s so persever,
That when we live no more, we may live ever.

Did you see Poems about Missing You collection?

Poem for My Love by June Jordan
How do we come to be here next to each other
in the night
Where are the stars that show us to our love
inevitable
Outside the leaves flame usual in darkness
and the rain
falls cool and blessed on the holy flesh
the black men waiting on the corner for
a womanly mirage
I am amazed by peace
It is this possibility of you
asleep
and breathing in the quiet air

most beautiful love poems for him

I Love You by Ella Wheeler Wilcox
I love your lips when they’re wet with wine
And red with a wild desire;
I love your eyes when the lovelight lies
Lit with a passionate fire.
I love your arms when the warm white flesh
Touches mine in a fond embrace;
I love your hair when the strands enmesh
Your kisses against my face.

Not for me the cold, calm kiss
Of a virgin’s bloodless love;
Not for me the saint’s white bliss,
Nor the heart of a spotless dove.
But give me the love that so freely gives
And laughs at the whole world’s blame,
With your body so young and warm in my arms,
It sets my poor heart aflame.

So kiss me sweet with your warm wet mouth,
Still fragrant with ruby wine,
And say with a fervor born of the South
That your body and soul are mine.
Clasp me close in your warm young arms,
While the pale stars shine above,
And we’ll live our whole young lives away
In the joys of a living love.

deep passionate love poems for him

Remember by Christina Rossetti
Remember me when I am gone away,
Gone far away into the silent land;
When you can no more hold me by the hand,
Nor I half turn to go yet turning stay.
Remember me when no more day by day
You tell me of our future that you plann’d:
Only remember me; you understand
It will be late to counsel then or pray.
Yet if you should forget me for a while
And afterwards remember, do not grieve:
For if the darkness and corruption leave
A vestige of the thoughts that once I had,
Better by far you should forget and smile
Than that you should remember and be sad.

Love And Friendship by Emily Bronte
Love is like the wild rose-briar,
Friendship like the holly-tree—
The holly is dark when the rose-briar blooms
But which will bloom most constantly?

The wild rose-briar is sweet in spring,
Its summer blossoms scent the air;
Yet wait till winter comes again
And who will call the wild-briar fair?

Then scorn the silly rose-wreath now
And deck thee with the holly’s sheen,
That when December blights thy brow
He still may leave thy garland green.

sweet love poems for him that will make him cry

Love by Margaret Atwood
This is a word we use to plug
holes with. It’s the right size for those warm
blanks in speech, for those red heart-
shaped vacancies on the page that look nothing
like real hearts. Add lace
and you can sell
it. We insert it also in the one empty
space on the printed form
that comes with no instructions. There are whole
magazines with not much in them
but the word love, you can
rub it all over your body and you
can cook with it too. How do we know
it isn’t what goes on at the cool
debaucheries of slugs under damp
pieces of cardboard? As for the weed-
seedlings nosing their tough snouts up
among the lettuces, they shout it.
Love! Love! sing the soldiers, raising
their glittering knives in salute.

Then there’s the two
of us. This word
is far too short for us, it has only
four letters, too sparse
to fill those deep bare
vacuums between the stars
that press on us with their deafness.
It’s not love we don’t wish
to fall into, but that fear.
this word is not enough but it will
have to do. It’s a single
vowel in this metallic
silence, a mouth that says
O again and again in wonder
and pain, a breath, a finger
grip on a cliffside. You can
hold on or let go.

short deep love poems for him

The Meeting by Katherine Mansfield
We started speaking,
Looked at each other, then turned away.
The tears kept rising to my eyes.
But I could not weep.
I wanted to take your hand
But my hand trembled.
You kept counting the days
Before we should meet again.
But both of us felt in our hearts
That we parted for ever and ever.
The ticking of the little clock filled the quiet room.
“Listen,” I said. “It is so loud,
Like a horse galloping on a lonely road,
As loud as a horse galloping past in the night.”
You shut me up in your arms.
But the sound of the clock stifled our hearts’ beating.
You said, “I cannot go: all that is living of me
Is here for ever and ever.”
Then you went.
The world changed. The sound of the clock grew fainter,
Dwindled away, became a minute thing.
I whispered in the darkness. “If it stops, I shall die.”

The Kiss by Sara Teasdale
I hoped that he would love me,
And he has kissed my mouth,
But I am like a stricken bird
That cannot reach the south.

For though I know he loves me,
To-night my heart is sad;
His kiss was not so wonderful
As all the dreams I had.

Famously Gorgeous Love Poems For Him The-Kiss-by-Sara-Teasdale

At Last by Elizabeth Akers Allen
At last, when all the summer shine
That warmed life’s early hours is past,
Your loving fingers seek for mine
And hold them close–at last–at last!
Not oft the robin comes to build
Its nest upon the leafless bough
By autumn robbed, by winter chilled,–
But you, dear heart, you love me now.

Though there are shadows on my brow
And furrows on my cheek, in truth,–
The marks where Time’s remorseless plough
Broke up the blooming sward of Youth,–
Though fled is every girlish grace
Might win or hold a lover’s vow,
Despite my sad and faded face,
And darkened heart, you love me now!

I count no more my wasted tears;
They left no echo of their fall;
I mourn no more my lonesome years;
This blessed hour atones for all.
I fear not all that Time or Fate
May bring to burden heart or brow,–
Strong in the love that came so late,
Our souls shall keep it always now!

love poems for him that will make him cry

Maud by Alfred, Lord Tennyson
A Monodrama
Come into the garden, Maud,
For the black bat, night, has flown,
Come into the garden, Maud,
I am here at the gate alone;
And the woodbine spices are wafted abroad,
And the musk of the rose is blown.

For a breeze of morning moves,
And the planet of Love is on high,
Beginning to faint in the light that she loves
In a bed of daffodil sky,
To faint in the light of the sun she loves,
To faint in his light, and to die.

All night have the roses heard
The flute, violin, bassoon;
All night has the casement jessamine stirr’d
To the dancers dancing in tune;
Till a silence fell with the waking bird,
And a hush with the setting moon.

I said to the lily, “There is but one
With whom she has heart to be gay.
When will the dancers leave her alone?
She is weary of dance and play.”
Now half to the setting moon are gone,
And half to the rising day;
Low on the sand and loud on the stone
The last wheel echoes away.

I said to the rose, “The brief night goes
In babble and revel and wine.
O young lord-lover, what sighs are those,
For one that will never be thine?
But mine, but mine,” so I sware to the rose,
“For ever and ever, mine.”

And the soul of the rose went into my blood,
As the music clash’d in the hall;
And long by the garden lake I stood,
For I heard your rivulet fall
From the lake to the meadow and on to the wood,
Our wood, that is dearer than all;

From the meadow your walks have left so sweet
That whenever a March-wind sighs
He sets the jewel-print of your feet
In violets blue as your eyes,
To the woody hollows in which we meet
And the valleys of Paradise.

The slender acacia would not shake
One long milk-bloom on the tree;
The white lake-blossom fell into the lake
As the pimpernel dozed on the lea;
But the rose was awake all night for your sake,
Knowing your promise to me;
The lilies and roses were all awake,
They sigh’d for the dawn and thee.

Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls,
Come hither, the dances are done,
In gloss of satin and glimmer of pearls,
Queen lily and rose in one;
Shine out, little head, sunning over with curls,
To the flowers, and be their sun.

There has fallen a splendid tear
From the passion-flower at the gate.
She is coming, my dove, my dear;
She is coming, my life, my fate;
The red rose cries, “She is near, she is near;”
And the white rose weeps, “She is late;”
The larkspur listens, “I hear, I hear;”
And the lily whispers, “I wait.”

She is coming, my own, my sweet;
Were it ever so airy a tread,
My heart would hear her and beat,
Were it earth in an earthy bed;
My dust would hear her and beat,
Had I lain for a century dead,
Would start and tremble under her feet,
And blossom in purple and red.

 

FacebookTwitterPrintMore859
Categories Poetry
Post navigation
14 Amazing Inspirational Poems Everyone Should Know
73 Most Amazing Grandmother Quotes That Will Touch Your Heart
Leave a Comment
Comment

Name
Name *
 Email
Email *
 Website
Website
This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed.

Copyright/DMCA Issue
If you are a copyright holder and believe your content was used, please let us now at. Submit a notice at here. We investigate your specific inquiry and resolve it within 24 hours. Thanks.
DISCLAIMER
This site is not intended to provide and does not constitute medical, legal, or other professional advice. The content on BayArt is designed to support, not replace, medical or psychiatric treatment. Please seek professional care if you believe you may have a condition.

© 2019 BayArt • Powered by GeneratePress
Privacy Policy
Search website
Custom Search
search
SHARE

ADDITIONAL INFO
Share to Facebook
Share to Twitter
Share to Print
More AddThis Share options
859
SHARES
SHARES

Busy old fool, unruly sun,
               Why dost thou thus,
Through windows, and through curtains call on us?
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run?
               Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide
               Late school boys and sour prentices,
         Go tell court huntsmen that the king will ride,
         Call country ants to harvest offices,
Love, all alike, no season knows nor clime,
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.

               Thy beams, so reverend and strong
               Why shouldst thou think?
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,
But that I would not lose her sight so long;
               If her eyes have not blinded thine,
               Look, and tomorrow late, tell me,
         Whether both th' Indias of spice and mine
         Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with me.
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,
And thou shalt hear, All here in one bed lay.

               She's all states, and all princes, I,
               Nothing else is.
Princes do but play us; compared to this,
All honor's mimic, all wealth alchemy.
               Thou, sun, art half as happy as we,
               In that the world's contracted thus.
         Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be
         To warm the world, that's done in warming us.
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;
This bed thy center is, these walls, thy sphere.



Body of a Woman 


Body of a woman, white hills, white thighs, 
you look like a world, lying in surrender. 

My rough peasant's body digs into you 

and makes the son leap from the depth of the earth. 

I was alone like a tunnel. The birds fled from me, 
and night swamped me with its crushing invasion. 

To survive myself I forged you like a weapon, 
like an arrow in my bow, a stone in my sling. 

But the hour of vengeance falls, and a love you. 

Body of skin, of moss, of eager and firm milk. 

Oh the goblets of the breast! Oh the eyes of absence! 

Oh the pink roses of the pubis! Oh your voice, slow and 
sad ! 

Body of my woman, I will persist in your grace. 

My thirst, my boundless desire, my shifting road! 

Dark River-beds where the eternal thirst flows 
and weariness follows, and the infinite ache. 



II 


The Light Wraps You 


The light wraps you in its mortal flame. 

Abstracted pale mourner, standing that way 
against the old propellers of twilight 
that revolves around you. 

Speechless, my friend, 

alone in the loneliness of this hour of the dead 
and filled with lives of fire, 
and pure heir of the ruined day. 

A bough of fruit falls from the sun on your dark garment. 
The great roots of night 
grow suddenly from your soul, 

and the things that hide in you come out again 
so that a blue and pallid people, 
your newly born, takes nourishment. 

Oh magnificent and fecund and magnetic slave 

of the circle that moves in turn through black and gold: 

rise, lead and possess a creation 

so rich in life that its flowers perish 

and it is full of sadness. 



Ill 


Ah Vastness of Pines 


Ah vastness of pines, murmur of waves breaking, 
slow play of lights, solitary bell, 
twilight falling in your eyes, toy doll, 
earth-shell, in whom the earth sings! 


I n you 
as you 
Aim my 
and in 


the rivers sing and my soul flees in them 
desire, and you send it where you will, 
road on your bow of hope 

a frenzy I will flee my flock of arrows. 


On all sides I see your waist of fog, 
and your silence hunts down my afflicted hours; 
my kisses anchor, and my moist desire nests 
in your arms of transparent stone. 


Ah your mysterious voice that love tolls and darkens 
in the resonant and dying evening! 

Thus in the deep hours I have seen, over the fields, 
the ears of wheat tolling in the mouth of the wind. 



IV 


The Morning Is Full 


The morning is full of storm 
in the heart of summer. 

The clouds travel like white handkerchiefs of goodbye, the 
wind, traveling, waving them in its hands. 

The numberless heart of the wind 
beating above our loving silence. 

Orchestral and divine, resounding among the trees 
like a language full of wars and songs. 

Wind that bears off the dead leaves with a quick raid and 
deflects the pulsing arrows of the birds. 

Wind that topples her in a wave without spray 
and substance without weight, and leaning fires. 

Her mass of kisses breaks and sinks, 
assailed in the door of the summer's wind. 



V 


So That You Will Hear Me 


So that you will hear me 
my words 

sometimes grow thin 

as the tracks of the gulls on the beaches. 

Necklace, drunken bell 

for your hands as smooth as grapes. 

And I watch my words from a long way off. 

They are more yours than mine. 

They climb on my old suffering ivy. 

It climbs the same way on damp walls. 

You are to blame for this cruel sport. 

They are fleeing from my dark lair. 

You fill everything, you fill everything. 

Before you they are peopled in the solitude that you occupy, 
and they are more used to my sadness than you are. 

Now I want them to say what I want to say to you 
and to make you hear as I wasn't you to hear me. 

The winds of anguish still hauls on them as usual. 

Sometimes hurricanes of dreams still knock them over. 

You listen to other voices in my painful voice 

Lament of old mouths, blood of old supplications. 

Love me, companion. Don't forsake me. Follow me. 

Follow me, companion, on this wave of anguish. 

But my words become stained with your love. 

You occupy everything, you occupy everything. 

I am making them into an endless necklace 
for your white hands, smooth as grapes. 



VI 


I Remember You As You Were 


I remember you as you were last autumn. 

You were the grey beret and the still heart. 

In your eyes the flames of twilight fought on. 

And the leaves fell on the water of your soul. 

Clasping my arms like a climbing plant 

the leaves garnered your voice, that was slow and at peace. 
Bonfire of awe in which my thirst was burning. 

Sweet blue hyacinth twisted over my soul. 

I feel your eyes traveling, and the autumn is far off: grey 
beret, voice of bird, heart like a house, 
towards which my deep longings migrated 
and my kisses fell, happy as embers. 

Sky from a ship. Field from the hills: 

Your memory is made of light, of smoke, of a still pond! 
Beyond your eyes, farther on, the evenings were blazing. 

Dry autumn leaves revolved in your soul. 



VII 


Leaning Into The Afternoons 


Leaning into the afternoons I cast my sad nets 
towards your oceanic eyes. 

There in the highest blaze my solitude lengthens and flames, 
its arms turning like a drowning man's. 

I sent out red signals across your absent eyes 
that move like the sea near a lighthouse. 

You keep only darkness, my distant female, 

from your regard sometimes the coast of dread emerges. 

Leaning into the afternoons I fling my sad nets 
to the sea that beats on your marine eyes. 

The birds peck at the first stars 

that flash like my soul when I love you. 

The night on its shadowy mare 
shedding blue tassels over the land. 



VIII 


White Bee 


White bee, you buzz in my soul, drunk with honey, 
and your flight winds in slow spirals of smoke. 

I am the one without hope, the word without echoes, 
he who lost everything and he who had everything. 

Last hawser, in you creaks my last longing. 

In my barren land you are the final rose. 

Ah you who are silent! 

Let your deep eyes close. There the night flutters. 

Ah your body, a frightened statue, naked. 

You have deep eyes in which the night flails. 

Cool arms of flowers and a lap of rose. 

Your breasts seem like white snails. 

A butterfly of shadow has come to sleep in your belly. 

Ah you who are silent! 

Here is the solitude from which you are absent. 

It is raining. The sea wind is hunting stray gulls. 

The water walks barefoot in the wet streets. 

From that tree the leaves complain as though they were sick. 

White bee, even when you are gone you buzz in my soul 
You live again in time, slender and silent. 

Ah you who are silent! 



IX 


Drunk With Pines 


Drunk with pines and long kisses, 
like summer I steer the fast sail of roses, 
bent towards the death of the thin day, 
stuck into my solid marine madness. 

Pale and lashed to my ravenous water, 

I cruise in the sour smell of the naked climate, 
still dressed in grey and bitter sounds 
and a sad crest of abandoned spray. 

Hardened by passions, I go mounted on my one wave, 
lunar, solar, burning and cold, all at once, 
becalmed in the throat of fortunate isles 
that are white and sweet as cool hips. 

In the moist night my garment of kisses trembles 
charged to insanity with electric currents, 
heroically dividing into dreams 
and intoxicating roses practising on me. 

Upstream, in the midst of the outer waves, 
your parallel body yields to my arms 
like a fish infinitely fastened to my soul, 
quick and slow, in the energy under the sky. 



X 


We Have Lost Even 


We have lost even this twilight. 

No one saw us this evening hand in hand 
while the blue night dropped out of the world. 

I have seen from my window 

the fiesta of sunset in the distant mountain tops. 

Sometimes a piece of sun 

burned like a coin between my hands. 

I remembered you with my soul clenched 
in the sadness of mine that you know. 

Where were you then? 

Who else was there? 

Saying what? 

Why will the whole of love come on me suddenly 
when I have sad and feel you are far away? 

The book fell that is always turned to at twilight 
and my cape rolled like a hurt dog at my feet. 

Always, always you recede through the evenings 
towards where the twilight goes erasing statues. 



XI 


Almost Out of Sky 


Almost out of the sky, half of the moon 
anchors between two mountains. 

Turning, wandering night, the digger of eyes. 
Let's see how many stars are smashed in the pool. 


It makes a cross of mourning between my eyes, and runs away. 
Forge of blue metals, nights of stilled combats, 
my heart revolves like a crazy wheel. 

Girl who have from so far, brought me so far, 
sometimes you glance flashes out under the sky. 

Rumbling, storm, cyclone of fury, 

you cross above my heart without stopping. 

Wind from the tombs carries off, wrecks, scatters your 
sleepy root . 


The big trees on the other side of her, uprooted. 

But you, cloudless girl, question of smoke, corn tassel. 

You were what the wind was making with illuminated leaves. 
Behind the nocturnal mountains, white lily of conflagration, 
ah, I can say nothing! You were made of everything. 


Longing that sliced my breast into pieces, 

it is time to take another road, on which she does not 

smile . 


Storm that buried the bells, muddy swirl of torments, 
why touch her now, why make her sad. 

Oh to follow the road that leads away from everything, 
without anguish, death, winter waiting along it 
with their eyes open through the dew. 



XII 


Your Breast Is Enough 


Your breast is enough for my heart, 
and my wings for your freedom. 

What was sleeping above your soul will rise 
out of my mouth to heaven. 

In you is the illusion of each day. 

You arrive like the dew to the cupped flowers. 

You undermine the horizon with your absence. 
Eternally in flight like the wave. 

I have said that you sang in the wind 
like the pines and like the masts. 

Like them you are tall and taciturn, 

and you are sad, all at once, like a voyage. 

You gather things to you like an old road. 

You are peopled with echoes and nostalgic voices. 
I awoke and at times the birds fled and migrated 
that had been sleeping in your soul. 



XIII 


I Have Gone Marking 


I have gone marking the atlas of your body 
with crosses of fire. 

My mouth went across: a spider trying to hide. 

In you, behind you, timid, driven by thirst. 

Stories to tell you on the shore of the evening, 
sad and gentle doll, so that you should not be sad. 

A swan, a tree, something far away and happy. 

The season of grapes, the ripe and fruitful season. 

I who lived in a harbour from which I loved you. 

The solitude crossed with dream and with silence. 

Penned up between the sea and sadness. 

Soundless, delirious, between two motionless gondoliers. 

Between the lips and the voice something goes dying. 
Something with the wings of a bird, something of anguish and 
oblivion . 

The way nets cannot hold water. 

My toy doll, only a few drops are left trembling. 

Even so, something sings in these fugitive words. 

Something sings, something climbs to my ravenous mouth. 

Oh to be able to celebrate you with all the words of joy. 

Sing, burn, flee, like a belfry at the hands of a madman. 

My sad tenderness, what comes over you all at once? 

When I have reached the most awesome and the coldest summit 
my heart closes like a nocturnal flower. 



XIV 


Every Day You Play 


Every day you play with the light of the universe. 

Subtle visitor, you arrive in the flower and the water. 

You are more that this white head that I hold tightly 
as a cluster of fruit, every day, between my hands. 

You are like nobody since I love you. 

Let me spread you out among the yellow garlands. 

Who writes your name in letters of smoke among the stars of 
the south? 

Oh let me remember you as you were before you existed. 


Suddenly the wind howls and bangs my shut window. 

The sky is a net crammed with shadowy fish. 

Here all the winds will let go sooner or later, all of them. 
The rain takes off her clothes. 

The birds go by, fleeing. 

The wind. The wind. 

I can contend only against the power of men. 

The storm whirls dark leaves 

and turns loose all the boats that were moored last night to 
the sky. 

You are here. Oh you do not run away. 

You will answer me to the last cry. 

Cling to me as though you were frightened. 

Even so, at one time a strange shadow ran through your eyes. 

Now, now too, little one, you bring me honeysuckle, 
and even your breasts smell of it. 

While the sad wind goes slaughtering butterflies 
I love you, and my happiness bites the plum of your mouth. 

How you must have suffered against getting accustomed to me, 
my savage, solitary soul, my name that sends them all 
running . 

So many times have we seen the morning star burn, kissing 
our eyes, 

and over our heads the grey light unwind in turning fans. 

My words rained over you, stroking you. 



A long time I have loved the sunned mother-of-pearl of your 
body . 

I go so far as to think you own the universe. 

I will bring you happy flowers from the mountains, 
bluebells, 

dark hazels, and rustic baskets of kisses. 

I want 

to do with you what spring does with the cherry trees. 



XV 


I Like For You To Be Still 


I like for you to be still: I as though you were absent, 
and you do not hear me far away and my voice does not touch 
you . 

It seems as though your eyes had flown away 
and it seems that a kiss had sealed your mouth 

As all things are filled with my soul 

you emerge from the things, filled with my soul. 

You are like my soul, a butterfly of dream, 
and you are like the word Melancholy. 

I like for you to be still, and you are still far away. 

It sounds as though you were lamenting, a butterfly cooing 
like a dove . 

And you hear me from far away, and my voice does not reach 
you : 

Let me come to be still in you silence. 

And let me talk to you with your silence 
that is bright as a lamp, simple as a ring. 

You are like the night, with its stillness and 
constellations . 

Your silence is that of a star, as remote and candid. 

I like for you to be still: it is though you were absent, 
distant and full of sorrow as though you had died. 

One word then, one smile, is enough. 

And I am happy, happy that it's not true. 



XVI 


In My Sky As Twilight 


In my sky at twilight you are like a cloud 

and your form and colour are the way I love them. 

You are mine, mine, woman with sweet lips 
and in your life my infinite dreams live. 

The lamp of my soul dyes your feet. 

My sour wine is sweeter than your lips, 

oh reaper of my evening song, 

how solitary dreams believe you to be mine! 

You are mine, mine, I go shouting it to the afternoon' 
wind, and the wind hauls on my widowed voice. 

Huntress of the depths of my eyes, your plunder 
stills your nocturnal regard as though it were water. 

You are taken in the net of my music, my love, 
and my nets of music are wide as the sky. 

My soul is borne on the shore of your eyes of mourning 
In your eyes of mourning the land of dreams begins. 



XVII 


Thinking, Tangling Shadows 


Thinking , tangling shadows in the deep solitude. 

You are far away too, oh farther than anyone. 

Thinking, freeing birds, dissolving images, 
burying lamps. 

Belfry of fogs, how far away, up there! 

Stifling laments, milling shadowy hopes, 
taciturn miller, 

night falls on you face downward, far from the city. 

Your presence is foreign, as strange as a thing. 

I think, I explore great tracts of my life before you. 
My life before anyone, my harsh life. 

The shout facing the sea, among the rocks, 
running free, mad, in the sea-spray. 

The sad rage, the shout, the solitude of the sea. 
Headlong, violent, stretched towards the sky. 

You, woman, what were you there, what ray, what vane 
of that immense fan? You were as far as you are now. 
Fire in the forest! Burn in blue crosses. 

Burn, burn, flame up, sparkle in trees of light. 

It collapses, crackling. Fire. Fire. 

And my soul dances, seared with curls of fire. 

Who calls? What silence peopled with echoes? 

Hour of nostalgia, hour of happiness, hour of solitude, 
hour that is mine from among them all! 

Hunting horn through which the wind passes singing. 

Such a passion of weeping tied to my body. 

Shaking of all the roots, 
attack of all the waves! 

My soul wandered, happy, sad, unending. 

Thinking, burying lamps in the deep solitude. 


Who are you, who are you? 



XVIII 


Here I Love You 


Here I love you. 

In the dark pines the wind disentangles itself. 

The moon glows like phosphorus on the vagrant waters. 
Days, all one kind, go chasing each other. 

The snow unfurls in dancing figures. 

A silver gull slips down from the west. 

Sometimes a sail. High, high stars. 

Oh the black cross of a ship. 

Alone . 

Sometimes I get up early and my soul is wet. 

Far away the sea sounds and resounds. 

This is a port . 

Here I love you. 

Here I love you and the horizon hides you in vain. 

I love you still among these cold things. 

Sometimes my kisses go on those heavy vessels 
that cross the sea towards no arrival. 

I see myself forgotten like those old anchors. 

The piers sadden when the afternoon moors there. 

My life grows tired, hungry to no purpose. 

I love what I do not have. You are so far. 

My loathing wrestles with the slow twilights. 

But night comes on and starts to sing to me. 

The moon turns its clockwork dream. 

The biggest stars look at me with your eyes. 

And as I love you, the pines in the wind 

want to sing your name with their leaves of wire. 



XIX 


Girl Lithe and Tawny 


Girl lithe and tawny, the sun that forms 

the fruits, that plumps the grains, that curls seaweeds 
filled your body with joy, and your luminous eyes 
and your mouth that has the smile of water. 

A black yearning sun is braided into the strands 
of your black mane, when you stretch your arms. 

You play with the sun as with a little brook 
and it leaves two dark pools in your eyes. 

Girl lithe and tawny, nothing draws me towards you. 
Everything bears me farther away, as though you were noon. 
You are the frenzied youth of the bee, 

the drunkenness of the wave, the power of the wheat-ear. 

My somber heart searches for you, nevertheless, 

and I love your joyful body, your slender and flowing voice. 

Dark butterfly, sweet and definitive 

like the wheat-field and the sun, the poppy and the water. 



XX 


Tonight I Can Write 


Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 

Write, for example, "The night is starry 

and the stars are blue and shiver in the distance." 

The night wind revolves in the sky and sings. 

Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 

I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too. 

Through nights like this one I held her in my arms. 

I kissed her again and again under the endless sky. 

She loved me, and sometimes I loved her too. 

How could I not have loved her great still eyes. 

Tonight I can write the saddest lines. 

To think that I do not have her. To feel that I have lost 
her . 

To hear the immense night, still more immense without her. 
And the verse falls to the soul like dew to the pasture. 

What does it matter that my love could not keep her. 

The night is starry and she is not with me. 

This is all. In the distance someone is singing. In the 
distance . 

My soul is not satisfied that it has lost her. 

My sight tries to find her as though to bring her closer 
My heart looks for her, and she is not with me. 

The same night whitening the same trees. 

We, of that time, are no longer the same. 

I no longer love her, that's for certain, but how I loved 
her . 

My voice tried to find the wind to touch her hearing. 
Another's. She will be another's. As she was before my 



kisses . 

Her voice, her bright body. Her infinite eyes. 

I am no longer in love with her, that's certain, but maybe I 
love her . 

Love is so short, forgetting is so long. 

Because through nights like this one I held her in my arms 
my soul is not satisfied that it has lost her. 

Though this be the last pain she makes me suffer 
and these the last verses that I write for her. 



The Song of Despair 


The memory of you emerges from the night around me. 

The river mingles in its stubborn lament with the sea. 

Deserted like the wharves at dawn. 

It is the hour of departure, oh deserted one! 

Cold flower heads are raining in my heart. 

Oh pit of debris, fierce cave of the shipwrecked. 

In you the wars and the flights accumulated 
From you the wings of the song birds rose. 

You swallowed everything, like distance. 

Like the sea, like time. In you everything sank! 

It was the happy hour of assault and the kiss. 

The hour of the spell that blazed like a lighthouse. 

Pilot's dread, fury of a blind driver, 

turbulent drunkenness of love, in you everything sank. 

In the childhood of mist my soul, winged and wounded. 
Lost discoverer, in you everything sank! 

You girdled sorrow, you clung to desire, 
sadness stunned you, in you everything sank! 

I made the wall of shadow draw back, 
beyond desire and act, I walked on. 

Oh flesh, my own flesh, woman that I loved and lost, 

I summon you in the moist hour, I raise my song to you. 

Like a jar you housed the infinite tenderness 

and the infinite oblivion shattered you like a jar. 

There was the black solitude of the islands, 
and there, woman of love, your arms took me in. 

There were thirst and hunger, and you were the fruit. 
There were grief and ruins, and you were the miracle. 

Ah woman, I do not know how you could contain me 
in the earth of your soul, in the cross of your arms! 

How horrible and brief was my desire of you! 



How difficult and drunken, how tensed and avid. 

Cemetery of kisses, there is still fire in your tombs, 
still the fruited boughs burn, pecked at by birds. 

Oh the bitter mouth, oh the kissed limbs, 
oh the hungering teeth, oh the entwined bodies. 

Oh the mad coupling of hope and force 
in which we merged and despaired. 

And the tenderness, light as water and as flour. 

And the word scarcely begun on the lips. 

This was my destiny and in it was the voyage of my longing, 
and in it my longing fell, in you everything sank. 

Oh pit of debris, everything fell into you, 

what sorrow did you not express, in what sorrow are you not 
drowned ! 

From billow to billow you still called and sang. 

Standing like a sailor on the prow of the vessel. 

You still flowered in songs, you still broke in currents. 

Oh pit of debris, open and bitter well. 

Pale blind diver, luckless slinger, 
lost discoverer, in you everything sank! 

It is the hour of departure, the hard cold hour 
in which the night fastens to all timetables. 

The rustling belt of the sea girdles the shore. 

Cold stars heave up, black birds migrate. 

Deserted like the wharves at dawn. 

Only the tremulous shadow twists in my hands. 

Oh farther than everything. Oh farther than everything. 

It is the hour of departure. Oh abandoned one!





















It was many and many a year ago, 
   In a kingdom by the sea, 
That a maiden there lived whom you may know 
   By the name of Annabel Lee; 
And this maiden she lived with no other thought 
   Than to love and be loved by me. 

I was a child and she was a child, 
   In this kingdom by the sea, 
But we loved with a love that was more than love— 
   I and my Annabel Lee— 
With a love that the wingèd seraphs of Heaven 
   Coveted her and me. 

And this was the reason that, long ago, 
   In this kingdom by the sea, 
A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling 
   My beautiful Annabel Lee; 
So that her highborn kinsmen came 
   And bore her away from me, 
To shut her up in a sepulchre 
   In this kingdom by the sea. 

The angels, not half so happy in Heaven, 
   Went envying her and me— 
Yes!—that was the reason (as all men know, 
   In this kingdom by the sea) 
That the wind came out of the cloud by night, 
   Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee. 

But our love it was stronger by far than the love 
   Of those who were older than we— 
   Of many far wiser than we— 
And neither the angels in Heaven above 
   Nor the demons down under the sea 
Can ever dissever my soul from the soul 
   Of the beautiful Annabel Lee; 

For the moon never beams, without bringing me dreams 
   Of the beautiful Annabel Lee; 
And the stars never rise, but I feel the bright eyes 
   Of the beautiful Annabel Lee; 
And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side 
   Of my darling—my darling—my life and my bride, 
   In her sepulchre there by the sea— 
   In her tomb by the sounding sea.